 
SESSION OVERVIEW 
This Representation Relationships Session explains how due diligence links to professionalism and self -
regulation in the practice of real estate. It revie ws key concepts of representation relationships inc luding 
the obligations and fiduciary duties owed by real e state professionals to their clients, the expected 
standard of care of real estate professionals in a representation relationship, and how these standard s are 
met.  
This Session will explore a variety of topics relat ed to representation relationships including: 
• Due diligence and professionalism in a self-regulat ed industry 
• Representation relationships 
• The standard of care owed to our real estate client s 
• The 5Ds of role clarity 
The Session also recaps with the process that real estate professionals can follow to meet the disclos ure 
and acknowledgement requirements when establishing a representation relationship with a client.  
 Session Learning Objectives 
Upon successful completion of the Representation Relationships  Session, you will be able to: 
• Define due diligence and representation relationshi ps in a self regulated industry 
• Identify the three fundamental principles of fiduci ary duty in a representation relationship 
• Explain the standard of care owed to clients and ho w it is established 
• Describe the importance of role clarity in a real e state transaction 
REAL ESTATE AND PROFESSIONALISM 
The courts treat real estate professionals as profe ssionals and expect them to follow the standards of  
practice and perform due diligence activities when representing their clients.  
Due Diligence and Professionalism  
Due diligence is the level of judgment, care, respo nsibility, and activity expected from, and ordinari ly 
exercised by, a reasonable and prudent person. As i t applies to residential real estate professionals,  due 
diligence also includes the systematic research and  analysis of factual and objective information 
regarding the aspects of a property that is, or may be, the subject of a transaction.  
Residential real estate professionals typically car ry out their due diligence activities prior to, or in the 
course of, a real estate transaction. The activitie s included in the due diligence process include the  
following:  
• Gathering the facts and information about the prope rty  
 
• Explaining the advantages and disadvantages of acce pting or rejecting a course of action 
• Documenting, in writing, information received from others 
• Documenting, in writing, information conveyed to cl ients with details as to where and when the 
conversations occurred  
• Providing all documentation and trade records about  a transaction to the brokerage for retention 
in the client file 
• Advising a client of the option to seek legal couns el or expert advice  
• Never expressing opinions about what will, or will not, occur in the future  
Due diligence activities, real estate professionals  perform on behalf of their clients involve the fol lowing 
considerations:  
• Physical Considerations : includes the physical aspects of the property suc h as its features, 
measurements, and general condition  
• Legal Considerations : includes the legal matters of the property such a s ownership and rights, 
title registrations, Real Property Reports, condomi nium bylaws, and material latent defects  
When representing clients, all real estate professi onals must carry out due diligence activities. The 
activities however, will vary depending upon: 
• the client’s role in the transaction (e.g. seller, buyer, landlord, tenant) 
• the client’s needs and/or concerns 
• the physical and legal considerations that need to be addressed 
While due diligence activities may differ in terms of scope and degree, real estate professionals are 
expected to carry out due diligence activities in t he following areas: 
• Property rights, ownership, and limitations 
• Registered interests on the property title (e.g. mo rtgage, rights-of way) 
• Property boundaries (e.g. encroachments, easements)    
• Restrictions imposed by covenants and/or condominiu m bylaws  
• Compliance with municipal bylaws, regulations, and relaxation permits  
• Property measurements  
• Property defects (e.g. material latent defects) 
• Property location as it relates to flood hazard are as  
• Property taxes   
• Other client concerns (e.g. noise considerations, c riminal activity) 
Due diligence activities carried out by real estate  professionals are critical aspects in any real est ate 
transaction. These activities provide clients with information they require to make an informed decisi on. 
Exercising due diligence is a necessary component i n providing competent service to our clients and 
maintaining the high degree of professionalism expe cted within the real estate industry.  
Self-Regulation and Professionalism   
As part of RECA’s mandate to protect consumers and to provide services that enhance and improve the 
industry and the business of real estate profession als, RECA sets and enforces standards of practice. The 
 
individually and collectively, govern themselves in  a manner that is in the public interest.  
Conduct must be at the highest levels of profession alism, integrity, and ethical behaviour regardless of 
whether you are acting as an industry professional or performing other non-industry related activities . 
RECA has addressed professionalism and due diligenc e through the Rules and its Statement on Self-
Regulation.  
 
INFORMATION  Excerpts from RECA’s Statement on Self-Regulation :  
The public interest is best served when all industr y professionals are provided the opportunity 
to be as good as they can be and all stakeholders c ollaborate to promote and support an 
environment in which licensees can flourish whilst ensuring the best possible experience for 
the public within the real estate profession. …  
Real estate professionals and brokerages will be ac ting with a professional mindset as they 
deliver services to the public. They have the prima ry responsibility for effective self-
regulation. Their standards of conduct and business  practices collectively will determine the 
value and integrity of the industry. They are ultim ately accountable for their conduct to 
clients, colleagues and the governing body. …  
The individual and collective willingness of the in dustry to provide competent service, act 
ethically, and achieve widespread compliance with t he Real Estate Act Rules is a more 
powerful and fundamental self-regulatory mechanism than the imposition of sanctions by 
RECA. The level of trust and confidence in the indu stry is determined by its individual and 
collective commitment to this principle. …   
REPRESENTATION RELATIONSHIPS 
When working with a real estate professional in a r eal estate transaction, you are either a client or a 
customer. There is an important difference between the two and it relates directly to due diligence. 
 
DEFINITION Client  
A client, by way of a  signed a contract, is legally represented by a real  estate 
professional and the real estate professional’s bro kerage.  Clients are to receive 
the level of judgement, care, responsibility, and a ctivity that is expected from, and 
ordinarily exercised by, their real estate professi onal.  
 
 
DEFINITION Customer : 
A customer is defined as an individual without a re presentation relationship. 
Services provided to a customer by a real estate pr ofessional are to only be 
performed to advance their client’s interests (e.g.  to help their client sell or 
purchase a property). This course does not address the responsibilities that real 
estate professionals have to customers.  
 
 
 
Overview of General Obligations 
In a representation relationship, the real estate p rofessional, on behalf of their brokerage, represen ts one 
party in a trade or potential trade in real estate and must perform general obligations imposed by com mon 
law.  
 
Exercise Care 
and Skill Real estate professionals are expected to possess t he necessary skills and 
knowledge to perform their services at a level of c ompetence expected of any 
prudent, reasonable, well-trained professional. The y must provide complete and 
accurate information and when appropriate, recommen d that their clients obtain 
expert advice in order to make an informed decision .   
Act Honestly Real estate professionals must act honestly and ens ure adherence to the facts in 
all their dealings with clients. They must ensure t hey do not mislead their clients 
through their statements, actions, or omissions. 
Negotiate 
Favourable 
Terms Real estate professionals must advance the client’s  interests by assisting in 
negotiations, and drafting favourable terms and con ditions to help the client buy, 
sell, or rent their property. 
Maintain 
Confidentiality  Real estate professionals must maintain confidentia lity regarding all matters that 
could adversely affect the client or in any way und ermine the client’s position 
during negotiations. 
All information received from the client or obtaine d through representing the 
client, must remain confidential. Common examples i nclude personal client 
information, the client’s motivation for selling or  buying, and the amount to be 
accepted or paid during negotiations. This duty of confidentiality survives 
termination of the representation relationship and the closing of the transaction. 
Disclose 
Information Real estate professionals must disclose all informa tion pertinent to the 
representation relationship and all matters relevan t to the transaction. It is up to 
the client to determine what information is pertine nt and relevant. Disclosure 
must be timely and made before the client makes a d ecision. This is especially 
important, when the information or lack thereof may  have a detrimental impact 
on the client. The goal of full disclosure is to en sure the client has all of the 
information necessary to make an informed decision.  
Act in Person Real estate professionals must personally perform t he activities required in the 
provision of services to clients. The obligation to  act in person is included in the 
Rules. Only brokerages and individuals authorized b y RECA may trade in real 
estate. Unauthorized assistants and administrative brokerage staff must not carry 
out activities that require an authorization, even when a client has given their 
consent.  
The Rules also restrict real estate professionals t o only trade in the name that 
appears on their real estate licence and only on be half of the brokerage with which 
they are registered. 
Obey Lawful 
Instructions Real estate professionals are obligated to follow t he clients’ lawful instructions, 
regardless of whether they agree with them or not. In the real estate profession, 
lawful instructions are any instructions that are r easonable and ordinary under the 
circumstances. To ensure that clients only provide lawful instructions, the scope 
of the real estate professional’s authority must be  clearly outlined in a written 
 
Perform 
Mandate Real estate professionals must perform the mandate as set out in the written 
service agreement. It is the responsibility of all real estate professionals to 
understand the services they have agreed to provide  and their scope of authority 
to fulfill their mandate. 
PRINCIPLES UNDERLYING FIDUCIARY DUTIES 
The legal system in Canada recognizes that there ar e certain relationships where one party must act in  
the best interests of the other in an exemplary man ner. These relationships include representation 
relationships (agency relationships) that typically  give rise to fiduciary duties. Fiduciary duties ar ise in 
a representation relationship between a client and real estate professional where clients is in a posi tion 
of vulnerability is trusting that their interests w ill be protected by the real estate professional. W hile not 
all representation relationships give rise to fiduc iary duties, most do. As such, real estate professi onals 
must know the circumstances that create fiduciary d uties.  
A fiduciary representation relationship is based on  three fundamental principles that include:  
• Trust and Confidence : The key factor for determining if a representatio n relationship gives 
rise to fiduciary duties is whether the client plac es trust and confidence in the real estate 
professional. As a result, the client relies on the  real estate professional’s advice. In relying on 
the advice given, the client becomes dependent and vulnerable to the real estate professional. 
• Best Interests : In a representation relationship that involves fi duciary duties, the real estate 
professional must at all times act in the client’s best interests. A real estate professional must 
never permit personal interests or the interests of  another party to take precedence over the 
interests of the client. 
• Loyalty : The focus of any representation relationship that  gives rise to fiduciary duties is 
loyalty. A real estate professional must ensure tha t the client’s best interests are served. They 
must always take priority over the real estate prof essionals or another party’s interests. The real 
estate professional must not: 
- act in a way that would disadvantage or harm the cl ient 
- take personal advantage of business opportunities t he real estate professional discovers 
during the transaction 
Overview of Fiduciary Duties  
Fiduciary duties are created when the three fundame ntal principles; trust and confidence, best interes ts, 
and loyalty, are present in a representation relati onship. Real estate professionals must comply with the 
following fiduciary duties when representing client s:  
Representation Relationship Fiduciary Duties  
Provide 
Utmost 
Loyalty The duty of loyalty requires real estate profession als to act honestly, in good faith, 
and place the client’s interests above any other pa rty’s interest. This includes the real 
 
estate professional to refrain from conduct that would  disadvan tage or harm the 
client’s interests. 
Not Make 
Secret 
Profits Real estate professionals are prohibited from makin g secret profits, receiving 
remuneration in any form, receiving compensation fr om anyone other than the client 
without their knowledge or informed consent. Real e state professionals must 
disclose to their clients any instance where anothe r party offers remuneration or 
compensation. 
Handle 
Confidential 
Information 
Properly Real estate professionals are under a duty to prese rve the confidentiality of any 
information that may be used to the disadvantage or  prejudice of their client’s 
interests. In this context, confidential informatio n includes information about the 
client, the property, or the transaction that is no t required by law to be disclosed. If 
disclosed, this information could be used by a cust omer to the disadvantage of the 
client. 
To Account Real estate professionals must account for all mone y and/or property belonging to 
the client. This duty compels a real estate profess ional to safeguard all money, 
documents, property, and information entrusted to t hem that relate to the client's 
transaction. 
Avoid 
Conflicts of 
Interest Real estate professionals must be able to recognize  and avoid conflicts of interest. A 
conflict of interest arises when a real or apparent  incompatibility exists between the 
interests of the two parties involved in the transa ction. Real estate professionals may 
encounter the following conflicts of interest in th eir practice:  
• Brokerage Interests : When the interests of the brokerage are at odds w ith the 
interests of the brokerage client. As an example,  a real estate professional with 
a brokerage wants to purchase a property of a clien t of the same brokerage, 
also referred to as a personal trade For informatio n on this type of conflict of 
interest, see Unit 4, Consumer Relationships and Un it 2, Real Estate Act, Rules 
and Regulations, in the Fundamentals of Real Estate  course. 
• Competing Interests : When the interests of clients, represented by the  same 
brokerage, compete with each other in a transaction  or potential transaction. 
As an example, Two buyers are attempting to purchas e the same property For 
information on this type of conflict of interest, s ee Unit 4, Consumer 
Relationships, in the Fundamentals of Real Estate c ourse. 
• Opposing Interests : When the interests of clients, represented by the  same 
brokerage, oppose one another in the same transacti on or potential 
transaction.  As an example,  a seller wants to get  the highest price for their 
property while the buyer wants to pay the lowest pr ice for the same property 
For more information on this type of conflict of in terest, see Unit 4, Consumer 
Relationships, in the Fundamentals of Real Estate c ourse. 
Real estate professionals must avoid instances that  may impact or be perceived to 
impact their ability to represent their clients As a result, real estate professionals 
must give careful thought to their actions and be a ble to identify and avoid potential 
or real conflicts of interest. Conflicts of interes t are discussed in Unit 7, Representing 
 
Disclose 
Conflicts of 
Interest Conflicts of interest, real and potential, may aris e during a real estate transaction. 
When they do, real estate professionals have a duty  to disclose circumstances 
perceived as a conflict of interest by their client . When a conflict of interest, real or 
potential, arises, real estate professionals must p rove the following has been 
addressed:  
• They have made full and timely disclosure of all re levant facts which would 
likely influence the client’s actions  
• The client has agreed to continue with the transact ion despite knowing of the 
conflict of interest 
• The transaction is fair and equitable for all parti es involved and is referred to as 
‘an arm’s length transaction’ 
Demonstrating Competence 
Demonstrating competence is the general obligation to exercise care and skill. Real estate professiona ls 
must exercise care and skill when working with clie nts (i.e. when in a representation relationship). T he 
degree of care and skill expected of a real estate professional is considered: 
• usual and necessary for the real estate profession 
• necessary for the proper performance of the actions  that have been undertaken 
The expected degree of care and skill is one of rea sonableness, according to how a knowledgeable and 
well-trained real estate professional would act. 
A real estate professional exercises care and skill  by providing competent service. Competent means 
you possess the necessary knowledge, skills, and ab ility to perform an action proficiently. Real estat e 
professionals should not represent clients in matte rs beyond their expertise or agree to provide servi ces 
they are incapable of performing. These situations clearly do not provide competent service to the cli ent.  
If a real estate professional cannot provide compet ent service to a client, one of the following optio ns 
may be a potential solution:  
• Be Supervised : The real estate professional could work under the  supervision of another real 
estate professional at the same brokerage who posse sses the relevant knowledge, skills, and 
experience to provide competent service to the clie nt 
• Refer : The real estate professional may refer their clie nt to another real estate professional who 
is capable of providing competent service. The indi vidual accepting the referral may be 
registered with the same or different brokerage and  must specialize in the applicable area of real 
estate practice or be focused on serving the geogra phic area. The referring real estate 
professional must ensure that they have obtained th e client’s written consent before making the 
referral. Any referral payments must be made throug h the brokerage. The referring real estate 
professional should document the referral for the b rokerage records 
Failure to exercise care and skill exposes real est ate professionals, their brokerages, and their clie nts to 
liability that may result in legal action and/or th e payment of damages. The real estate professional and 
the brokerage may also be subject to conduct deserv ing of sanction by RECA. In addition, it undermines  
 
The standard of care when fulfilling general obliga tions and fiduciary duties to clients is the standa rd of 
care expected of a reasonable and prudent real esta te professional in similar circumstances. This stan dard 
of care applies to all real estate professionals in  all activities involving clients.  
A standard of care is a legal concept that establis hes the attention and caution that a reasonable and  
prudent person would exercise in a particular set o f circumstances. The standard of care is determined  
objectively, meaning it is based on facts. To deter mine if the general obligations owed to a client ar e 
fulfilled, the actions that were or were not taken by the real estate professional are compared that o f a 
reasonable and prudent real estate professional in similar circumstances. Personal interpretations or 
intervening circumstances are not used by the court s in determining standard of care or to explain why  
a real estate professional did or did not act accor ding to the expected standard.  Examples of such ex cuses 
include the following: 
• “I just got my authorization to trade in real estat e” 
• “I’ve never done this type of real estate transacti on before”  
• “I didn’t realize that I had to do that” 
• “I did the best that I could under the circumstance s” 
• “It shouldn’t matter since I didn’t charge for my s ervices” 
Determining Standard of Care 
The standard of care is higher for real estate prof essionals when representing clients. Because real 
estate professionals have increased responsibilitie s when working with clients, it results in a higher  
standard of care expectation. The responsibilities of real estate professionals when working with 
clients include the following: 
• Services to clients require the exercise of discret ion and judgement 
• The understanding that more general obligations are  owed to clients  
• The potential for the representation relationship t o give rise to fiduciary duties  
The Rules (section 41) establish that real estate p rofessionals must provide competent service to 
clients. The Rules (sections 57 and 58) also establ ish the standard of care that real estate professio nals 
 
RULE As established in Rule 57, the basic obligations re lated to competent service of a 
real estate professional who is in a representation  relationship with a seller include 
the following: 
  (a) to use best efforts to market the property an d to promote the interests of the 
seller 
  (g) to exercise reasonable care and skill in the performance of the agreement 
  (h) to assist the seller in negotiating favourabl e terms and conditions with a buyer 
and in preparing and complying with a legally bindi ng agreement of purchase and 
sale of the property 
  (i) to disclose to all buyers all material latent  defects affecting the property known 
to the industry member 
  (k) to disclose, in a timely manner, to the selle r all relevant facts affecting the 
transaction known to the industry member 
  (l) to keep the seller fully informed regarding t he progress of the transaction  
  (m) to advise the seller to obtain expert advice on matters of importance to the 
seller   
Real estate brokerages provide a wide range of serv ices to clients. For some clients, a brokerage may 
handle all aspects of an actual or potential real e state transaction, including entering into contract s on 
behalf of clients. For other clients, the brokerage  may only perform basic administrative tasks, such as 
filling out standardized forms and agreements. Ulti mately, the breadth and depth of services provided 
by a brokerage varies according to the business mod el chosen by the brokerage and the specific needs 
of each client.   
Real estate professionals should be aware that if t hey claim to possess special expertise and/or 
experience (e.g. condominium specialist, area speci alist), they are judged according to a higher stand ard 
of care. Failure to uphold the standard of care exp ected of a real estate professional with that speci al 
 
RULE As established in Rule 58, the basic obligations re lated to competent service of a 
real estate professional who is in a representation  relationship with a buyer include 
the following:  
(a) use best efforts in locating a property in the specified market area that meets 
the material   requirements identified by the buyer  and generally to promote the 
interests of the buyer 
(g) exercise reasonable care and skill in the perfo rmance of the agreement 
(i) take reasonable steps to discover relevant fact s pertaining to any property for 
which the buyer is considering making an offer  
   (j) disclose, in a timely manner, to the buyer a ll relevant facts known to the 
industry member   affecting a property or transacti on  
   (k) advise the buyer to obtain expert advice on matters of importance to the 
buyer 
 
legal action by the client.  
The standard of care owed to clients varies based o n the scope of services provided under the client 
representation relationship with that brokerage. Fo r example, the standard of care expected of real es tate 
professionals who provide mere posting services is less than that owed to clients where real estate 
professionals are providing services that require d iscretion or judgment. 
To determine if a real estate professional has met the standard of care for a client in a given situat ion, 
an objective review of all facts is performed. The measures to determine the standard of care for a 
particular situation include the following:  
• Professional Standards : A reasonable and prudent real estate professional  would comply with 
the requirements set out in all applicable legislat ion (e.g. Real Estate Act ) and any requirements 
in the Rules, Practice Guides, Information Bulletin s, re-licensing education courses, or other 
resources instituted by RECA 
• Professional Norms and Practices : A reasonable and prudent real estate professional  would 
conduct themselves according to the norms and pract ices of the real estate profession. Examples 
of these may be best practices promoted by professi onal associations and the brokerage 
• Expert Testimony : Other real estate professionals, or experts, may provide information as to 
the expectations of a reasonable and prudent real e state professional and how they would have 
conducted themselves in similar circumstances 
Meeting the Standard of Care  
Real estate professionals can ensure they meet the standard of care expected of them, when performing 
services for their clients, by understanding and ca rrying out the following activities. 
Meeting the Standard of Care 
Know the Type 
of Consumer 
Relationship Real estate professionals must be able to explain t he types of consumer 
relationships (i.e. representation, non-representat ion). The role of the real 
estate professional must be clear to both the consu mer and the real estate 
professional. Consumers should be able to make an i nformed choice as to the 
type of relationship they want with the real estate  professional and determine 
the services to be performed on their behalf. 
Act Consistent 
with the 
Relationship 
Chosen Once the consumer chooses the relationship type, it  is important that the real 
estate professional act in a manner consistent with  that relationship. The 
provision of services and due diligence activities should be consistent with the 
type of relationship. 
Know the 
Brokerage 
Services  Real estate professionals should be familiar with t he services their brokerage 
offers and provide only those services consistent w ith the brokerage service 
model chosen. For example, if the brokerage model i s the provision of mere 
posting services, the services performed for the co nsumer by the real estate 
professional should be consistent with this model. The brokerage service model 
chosen by the consumer is described in the brokerag e’s written service 
agreement. Brokerage service models vary and real e state professionals should 
 
Brokerage 
Policies and 
Procedures Real estate brokerages establish policies and proce dures to comply with the 
requirements of the Real Estate Act  and properly manage the brokerage 
business. A well-managed brokerage is able to respo nd to the needs of clients 
in a timely and attentive manner. 
Be Aware of 
Market and 
Practice Issues Real estate professionals should maintain an awaren ess of current real estate 
market conditions. They should also be aware of oth er issues that do or may 
affect their area of real estate practice (e.g. res idential, commercial, property 
management) or the geographic region in which they practice.  
Make 
Reasonable 
Efforts to 
Confirm 
Information Real estate professionals must remember that others  rely on the information 
they provide.  As a result, they must ensure all re levant information is provided 
to the consumers so they can make an informed decis ion. They should not 
provide information to consumers or rely on informa tion provided by others 
unless it can be verified as being accurate and com plete. 
Exercise Due 
Care When 
Preparing 
Documents Real estate professionals be certain that all forms , agreements, and other 
documents they prepare are worded properly, legally  binding, and delivered in 
a timely manner. Real estate professionals must be sure that the appropriate 
documentation for a transaction is used and that th e documentation is the most 
current version available. Real estate professional s should review all forms, 
agreements, and other documents they prepare thorou ghly to prevent errors 
and omissions from occurring. 
Seek Advice 
When 
Appropriate Real estate professionals must recognize the limits  of their professional 
knowledge, skills, and experience. When in doubt, t hey should seek the advice 
of their broker or broker delegate.   
Be a Lifelong 
Learner Real estate professionals should continuously seek out ways to stay current by 
increasing their knowledge and training. RECA, real  estate trade associations, 
local real estate boards, and other organizations r outinely offer courses. 
Subscriptions are also available to industry journa ls and professional 
publications. Education opportunities may be offere d by real estate brokerages 
for their real estate professionals, including webi nars, online courses, or annual 
conferences. 
ROLE OF REAL ESTATE PROFESSIONALS  
The Rules require real estate professionals to ensu re that consumers understand their role. This means  
real estate professionals must confirm that the con sumer understands the varying responsibilities and 
services associated with each type of real estate r elationship. When consumers are knowledgeable, they  
are better able to safeguard their interests, make informed decisions, and choose the best real estate  
relationship for their specific needs. Real estate professionals themselves must have a clear 
understanding of the responsibilities they owe and the services they can provide to clients as opposed  to 
 
RULE Rule 41 (e) states that real estate professionals m ust ensure the role of the industry 
member is clearly understood by their clients and t hird parties. 
Under this section of the Rules, a customer is desc ribed as a third party. 
Making Relationship Disclosures  
To ensure consumers understand the role of the real  estate professional in a trade or potential trade,  they 
should actively make efforts to disclose this infor mation. Real estate professionals are required disc lose 
the types of real estate relationships that are pos sible between themselves and consumers.  
Disclosure should be made in writing. Written discl osure provides proof that the disclosure was made 
and clarifies the understanding of all parties in t he event issues or disputes arise. Make the disclos ure 
when first approached by consumers who may be inter ested in establishing a real estate relationship. 
Once a real estate relationship is established, pro vide disclosure about the existing type of real est ate 
relationship to the other parties involved in the t rade or potential trade in real estate.  
 
 
RULE Rule 55(1) states that before eliciting or as soon as possible upon receiving 
confidential information from any person concerning  that person’s real estate 
needs, motivation, financial qualifications or in a ny event before entering into a 
service agreement, an industry member must disclose  in writing to that person: 
d)  the nature of the services the industry member will  provide; 
e)  whether the industry member is acting in the trade or anticipated trade on 
behalf of any other person, in any capacity; 
f)  any conflict of interest that may exist; and  
g)  any other facts that may be likely to influence the  person’s decision 
 
relationship exists with the real estate profession al and before any conflict of interest arise. Provi ding 
written disclosure in a timely manner gives consume rs the opportunity to consider their choice of real  
estate relationship.  
The requirement to provide written disclosure to a consumer is not prompted by any of the following 
actions: 
• A consumer attending a real estate professional’s o pen house 
• A consumer revealing their price range, preferred l ocation, and desired property styles  
• A consumer asking general questions to which factua l answers can be provided 
The Rules stipulate that written disclosure is need ed whenever a real estate professional receives or is 
about to receive confidential information from a co nsumer. Confidential information includes the 
consumer’s real estate needs, motivation, or financ ial ability.  
When real estate professionals provide written disc losures to consumers they must include the 
following: 
• Whether the real estate professional has entered in to a representation relationship with another 
party to the real estate transaction 
• The services the real estate professional will prov ide to the consumer 
• Any conflicts of interest that may exist between th e consumer and the real estate professional  
• Any additional facts or information that may influe nce the consumer’s decision to proceed with 
the real estate relationship 
If, subsequent to making written disclosure, there is a change to any information provided, the real e state 
professional must create an amendment to the writte n disclosure. If the established real estate 
relationship must be re-evaluated because a conflic t of interest or dispute arises, the written disclo sure 
provided by the real estate professional can be use d to facilitate this discussion. 
 
RULE Rule 55(2) states that if subsequent to this disclo sure, there is any material change 
in the facts, which have been disclosed, the indust ry member must immediately 
disclose the change to that person. 
Documenting Relationship Disclosures 
Upon providing written disclosure, real estate prof essionals must use their best efforts to obtain wri tten 
acknowledgement from the consumer. The written ackn owledgement should state that the consumer 
received written disclosure from the real estate pr ofessional and that they understand all of the 
information contained in the written disclosure. 
Real estate professionals in the practice of reside ntial real estate must provide consumers with RECA’ s 
Consumer Relationships Guide, accessible on RECA’s website, www.reca.ca. Periodically check the 
RECA website to ensure that you are using the curre nt Consumer Relationships Guide in your real estate  
practice. The Guide includes all information real e state professionals must include in written disclos ures 
 
Using RECA’S Consumer Relationships Guide provides real estate professionals with an opportunity 
to discuss the types of real estate relationships t hey may have with consumers. A copy of RECA’s 
Consumer Relationships Guide is included in the Uni t Appendix. 
In some instances, a consumer may decline to provid e written acknowledgement. If a consumer refuses 
to provide written acknowledgement, the real estate  professional should make note of the refusal in th e 
appropriate file and include the date, time, and re asons the consumer declined to provide written 
acknowledgement.  
 
RULE Rule 55(3) states that the industry member must use  their best efforts to obtain 
written acknowledgement of disclosures made pursuan t to this section. 
 Documenting Relationship Decisions 
Real estate professionals can transition the discus sion to other real estate relationship documents by  
providing the consumer with written disclosure and obtaining written acknowledgement. Other 
relationship documents include the customer acknowl edgement form (when a non-representation 
relationship is selected) or a written service agre ement (when a representation relationship is 
chosen). 
 
Customer Acknowledgement Forms : When a consumer chooses a non-representation rela tionship 
with a real estate professional, they are a custome r. When the real estate professional is representin g a 
client in the real estate transaction, then the con sumer must be treated as a customer. To assist real  estate 
 
Forms for buyers and sellers. Documents are accessi ble on RECA’s website, www.reca.ca. Check the 
RECA website periodically to ensure the most curren t forms used in your practice. Your brokerage or 
trade association may provide forms that are equiva lent to RECA’s Customer Acknowledgement Forms. 
If the area of practice is other than residential r eal estate, the real estate professional’s brokerag e may 
have developed its own customer acknowledgement for ms. You must provide signed customer 
acknowledgement forms to the brokerage for record k eeping.  
Written Service Agreements : When a consumer chooses a representation relation ship with a real estate 
professional, they are a client. In this case, the real estate professional must document the real est ate 
relationship with a written service agreement appro priate to the client type (i.e. seller, buyer) and for the 
specific services rendered. Real estate professiona ls may use the service agreements created by RECA 
or equivalent service agreements provided by their brokerage or trade association. Always use the 
current version of the service agreement in your pr actice. Provide a copy of the signed service agreem ent 
to the brokerage for its record keeping. The Fundam entals of Real Estate course discussed written 
service agreements in Unit 2, Real Estate Act, Rule s and Regulations and Unit 4, Consumer 
Relationships. 
Customizing Documentation 
RECA’s Consumer Relationships Guide, Customer Ackno wledgement Forms, and written service 
agreements contain mandatory content. Although thes e documents may be changed at the request of a 
consumer or tailored to the needs of a particular b rokerage (e.g. brokerage logo added, brokerage 
information added) the content, meaning, and intent  must not be altered. Real estate professionals sho uld 
be aware that some brokerages have created their ow n versions of these documents. Real estate 
professionals should speak with their broker or bro ker delegates to determine if brokerage-specific 
 
RULE The Rules: Rule 60.1 states: 
(1)  Subject to the Rules,  
(a)  The content of the Real Estate Council of Alberta f orms contained in 
Schedule 1 is mandatory for use when industry membe rs trade in 
residential real estate effective February 4, 2014.  
(b)  The Consumer Relationship Guide of the Real Estate Council of Alberta 
contained in Schedule 1 is mandatory for use when i ndustry members 
trade in residential real estate. 
(2)  If industry members use forms with different conten t than those set out in 
section A of Schedule 1, the forms used must contai n the mandatory content 
set out in Schedule 1 which mandatory content must not be directly or 
indirectly altered by the industry member. 
(3)  Any forms used by industry members may, in addition  to the mandatory 
content, include additional or supplementary conten t; however, such 
additional or supplementary content must not direct ly or indirectly alter the 
meaning or effect of the mandatory content and must  not alter the obligations 
or requirements of industry members outlined in the  Act or these Rules. 
(4)  Notwithstanding 60.1(2), upon the initiative and re quest of a client, an industry 
member may by hand add to, strikeout or alter any c ontent of the mandatory 
forms and, if agreed to by all the parties, such ch ange must be clearly indicated 
on the form and initialed by the client and industr y member. 
Acting Consistently 
Real estate professionals must ensure they act in a ccordance with the type of real estate relationship  
established even when written disclosure and acknow ledgement are made, and the appropriate forms or 
agreements are signed. This is because it is possib le to create a representation relationship through the 
actions of the real estate professional or consumer , even though it was not the intended or the agreed  
upon real estate relationship.  
Avoiding Unintended Relationships 
Although a real estate professional and a consumer have agreed (i.e. either orally or in writing) to a  
certain type of real estate relationship, the actio ns of both parties may unintentionally alter that 
relationship. If the actions taken by the real esta te professional and consumer are inconsistent with the 
established real estate relationship, these actions  may create an unintended real estate relationship.  When 
a real estate professional enters into a non-repres entation relationship, they must avoid any actions 
considered characteristic of a representation relat ionship.  
Representation relationships are not established by  the following actions: 
• Real estate professionals conveying documents or pr oviding general information to consumers  
• Real estate professionals using certain terms to re fer to consumers (e.g. client, customer) 
• Consumers using certain terms to refer to real esta te professionals (e.g. real estate agent, lease 
agent, buyer’s agent, seller’s agent) 
 
brokerage  
Unintended representation relationships may have de trimental consequences for the consumer, the real 
estate professional, and the brokerage. An unintend ed relationship may lead to confusion and cause 
disputes between the real estate professional and t he consumer. Consumers may also experience losses 
and incur liabilities. Real estate professionals an d their brokerage may find themselves in a conflict  of 
interest situation where loss of commissions, a san ction by RECA, or legal action for damages suffered  
by the consumer occur. 
THE 5DS OF ROLE CLARITY AND CONSISTENCY 
Real estate professionals must ensure that consumer s are clear on their role in a trade or potential t rade 
and act in a manner consistent with the real estate  relationship established.  
The 5 Ds of Role Clarity and Consistency, developed  by RECA, is a 5-stage process to support a 
professional mindset and to assist real estate prof essionals in conducting their practice in complianc e 
with the Rules. The steps in the 5 Ds of Role Clari ty and Consistency are shown below. 
 
Discuss the Types of Real Estate Relationships  
It is important that the real estate professional a ssist the consumer in understanding the difference 
between real estate relationships (i.e. non-represe ntation relationship or representation relationship ), and 
how responsibilities and services vary. This disclo sure should occur before or at the time the consume r 
provides confidential information. Provide disclosu re in writing to prove that the disclosure to the 
consumer was made. In the practice of residential r eal estate, real estate professionals must use RECA ’s 
Consumer Relationships Guide for disclosures. 
Step Discussing the Real Estate Relationship 
1.   Determine your representative capacity 
2.   Consumers determine the type of real estate relatio nship established between themselves 
and their real estate professional. The real estate  professional must provide complete 
disclosure and answer questions or concerns identif ied by the consumer to allow an 
 
informed decision to be made. If, however, the real  estate professional is representing 
another party in the real estate transaction that i nvolves the consumer, a non-
representation relationship with the consumer is th eir only option. Two clients cannot be 
represented in the same transaction due to a confli ct of interest. 
3.   Document your representative capacity 
4.   Once the real estate relationship is determined, th e next step is to document it in writing. 
Document non-representation relationships by using the appropriate customer 
acknowledgement form. Document representation relat ionships with the appropriate 
written service agreement. To ensure you are using the correct forms and agreements, 
speak with your broker or broker delegate. In addit ion, obtain written acknowledgement 
that the consumer understands the type of real esta te relationship chosen. 
5.   Disclose your representative capacity 
6.   Disclose your representative capacity (i.e. seller’ s agent, buyer’s agent, landlord’s agent, or 
tenant’s agent) to others involved in the trade or potential trade in real estate. Although 
timing of this disclosure may differ according to t he situation, make it before any 
confidential information is provided. If the real e state professional unexpectedly receives 
confidential information, the disclosure of their r epresentative capacity should occur 
immediately following its receipt. Whenever possibl e, make the disclosure to others 
involved in the trade or potential trade in writing . Real estate professionals should obtain 
written acknowledgement that the individual receive d and understood the disclosure. 
• Do actions consistent with your representative capa city  
• Once the real estate relationship is established, t he actions of the real estate 
professional and the services provided to the consu mer must be consistent with the 
established relationship. Any actions not consisten t with the established relationship 
may result in an unintended change. Typically, the concern relates to actions that 
would change a non-representation relationship into  a representation relationship. An 
unintended representation relationship may give ris e to confusion, disputes, legal 
action, and sanction by RECA. 
Benefits of Role Clarity and Consistency 
The following six benefits ensure consumer understa nding of the real estate professional’s role in tra des 
or potential trades: 
Meets Regulatory Requirements : The Rules require real estate professionals to en sure consumers 
clearly understand the nature of their real estate relationship and the role they play in a trade or p otential 
trade.  
Enhances Professionalism : When real estate professionals discuss the types of real estate relationships 
with consumers, and the responsibilities and servic es related to each, trust is created among the publ ic, 
in the individual real estate professional, and in the profession as a whole. 
Prevents Unintended Relationships : Specifying the established real estate relationsh ip decreases the 
 
representing them in the real estate trade. From th e perspective of brokerages and real estate 
professional, role disclosure clarifies whom they a re representing and whose interests they must prote ct. 
It ensures that the real estate professional acts w ith intention and conscious thought because their a ctions 
must be consistent with the established real estate  relationship. 
Clarifies Responsibilities to Consumers : Each real estate relationship identifies specific  
responsibilities owed to the consumer. A discussion  of potential relationship types should include an 
explanation of the responsibilities owed to the con sumer based on whether a non-representation or 
representation relationship is established.   
Clarifies Services to Consumers : Discuss the services to be provided or not provid ed to the consumer 
by the real estate professional, based on the real estate relationship established. This discussion wi ll help 
to manage the consumer’s service expectations throu ghout the real estate relationship and avoids 
consumers requesting services that are inconsistent  with the established real estate relationship. 
Reduces Disputes : To reduce confusion about responsibilities owed a nd services provided by the real 
estate professional discuss the real estate relatio nship. When the established real estate relationshi p is 
documented in writing, it demonstrates what the par ties agreed to in the event that a dispute arises.  
SUMMARY 
In summary, consumers can have two types of real es tate relationships with real estate professionals: 
non-representation relationships and representation  relationships. Under the Rules, real estate 
professionals have an obligation to ensure consumer s are clear as to the type of real estate relations hip 
they have established and the role that real estate  professional has in a real estate trade or potenti al trade. 
Written disclosures and written acknowledgements de monstrate that consumers have received 
information regarding the real estate relationship they have made with real estate professional and th at 
they understand responsibilities and services assoc iated with the relationship. Use of the 5 Ds of Rol e 
Clarity and Consistency ensure that the role of the  real estate professional is clear to everyone invo lved 
in a trade or potential trade in real estate and th at their actions are consistent with the type of re lationship 
chosen by the consumer.  
 
 
SESSION OVERVIEW 
Personal and confidential information as it relates  to the practice of real estate is reviewed in this  Session. 
It defines concepts, summarizes provincial and fede ral privacy legislation, and highlights the univers al 
principles that underpin privacy legislation.  
This Session will explore a variety of topics relat ed to client privacy and personal information inclu ding: 
• How privacy legislation impacts real estate profess ionals 
• Safeguards that ensure compliance with the brokerag e policies 
• Procedures for the protection of client information  as required under the Rules 
• How client confidentiality extends to real estate a nd virtual assistants  
The Session concludes with an overview of Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) and its implications 
for real estate professionals 
Session Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of the Client Privacy and Personal Information Session, you will be able to: 
• Describe how real estate professionals comply with the privacy principles in their practice  
• List eight ways real estate professionals can safeg uard client information  
• Describe the real estate professionals’ role in ens uring assistants protect client information    
• Identify how Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) applies to real estate 
PRIVACY COMPLIANCE IN REAL ESTATE  
Real estate brokerages are the legal entity authori zed by RECA to trade in real estate. As all 
representation relationships are between the broker age and the client, the brokerage is ultimately 
responsible for complying with privacy legislation and maintaining the confidentiality of client 
information under its control.  
Brokerages employ or engage real estate professiona ls to trade on behalf of the brokerage. Because the y 
are trading on behalf of the brokerage, they must p rovide the brokerage with copies of all client 
information and records received. Real estate profe ssionals are custodians of this information when it  is 
in their possession and bear the responsibility of the brokerage to comply with legislative and legal 
obligations regarding the clients’ personal and con fidential information. Real estate professionals ca n 
comply with legislative and legal obligations by: 
• Adhering to the information protection policies and  procedures established by their brokerage  
• Employ fair information practices consistent with t he requirements set out in the Real Estate 
 
Privacy is a fundamental human right and refers to an individual’s ability to retain control over his or 
her personal information. Personal information is a ny information that can identify an individual dire ctly 
(e.g. name, visual images, unique identification nu mbers) or in combination with other available 
information about the individual (e.g. date of birt h, height, and ethnicity). In the day-to-day activi ties of 
real estate professionals, detailed information abo ut clients is needed during the purchase, sale, and  
leasing of a property. Some information collected i s considered personal information under privacy 
legislation. Real estate professionals must protect  clients’ privacy and comply with the applicable 
privacy legislation when handling clients’ personal  information.   
 
EXAMPLE Personal information includes items such as an indi vidual’s name, personal address, 
personal phone number, personal email address, age,  birth date, unique 
identification numbers, marital status, gender, dep endents, income, religion, 
citizenship, personal photographs and videos, and m edical history.   
Although business contact information (e.g. busines s title and position, business phone and fax number , 
business email and website address) may contain inf ormation about an individual, it is not considered 
personal information under privacy legislation. As a result, it can be collected, used, and disclosed 
without the individual’s consent if the purpose is to contact the individual about his or her business  
responsibilities. Consent is required when business  contact information is collected, used, or disclos ed 
for any purpose other than contacting the individua l in his or her business capacity.  
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
In the course of providing services to clients, rea l estate professionals will collect and be privy to  
confidential information about the clients whom the y represent. As defined in the Rules, confidential 
information includes any information concerning the  client including the client’s financial or persona l 
situation, the client’s real estate, and transactio ns involving the client.  
Before or at the time of collecting a client’s conf idential information, the real estate professional must 
let the client know the reason for collecting the c onfidential information. The real estate profession al is 
prohibited from using the client’s confidential inf ormation for personal gain or any purpose other tha n 
the reason for which it was obtained.  
PRIVACY LEGISLATION AND REAL ESTATE PROFESSIONALS 
The right to privacy and the protection of personal  information in the private sector has become 
increasingly important to individuals largely due t o technology that allows organizations to collect, 
store, and manipulate large amounts of personal inf ormation. Individuals expect to have their privacy 
and personal information protected especially when they are involved in commercial activities. 
Commercial activities refer to any transaction, act , or conduct involving the exchange of goods and/or  
services. The purchase, sale, or leasing of real es tate is considered a commercial activity.     
Protecting an individuals’ personal information dur ing commercial activities is regulated by private 
sector privacy legislation. Private sector privacy legislation governs the collection, use, and disclo sure 
 
their personal information protected and the need o f organizations to collect, use, or disclose person al 
information for reasonable purposes. For real estat e professionals, collecting clients’ personal 
information is an essential part of doing business.  In doing so, they must ensure the personal informa tion 
is collected, used, disclosed, and maintained accor ding to the applicable privacy legislation.   
 
PRACTICE  
TIP Real estate brokerages should insert privacy clause s in their respective websites and 
forms to advise consumers as to the privacy policie s and procedures of the 
brokerage.  
The concerns clients have about their private and c onfidential information are based on a variety of 
issues, such as the protection of commercial or bus iness information, their ability to better negotiat e a 
trade in real estate, identity theft, and receiving  unsolicited calls. While building a successful rea l estate 
practice, it is essential that real estate professi onals integrate privacy and confidentiality practic es into 
their day-to-day activities in order to comply with  legislative requirements and meet client concerns.   
In Alberta, the protection of individuals’ personal  information during real estate transactions is reg ulated 
by the following privacy legislation:  
• The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act  (PIPEDA)  
• The Personal Information Protection Act  (PIPA) 
PIPEDA : The Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act (PIPEDA) is federal 
legislation regulating how private sector organizat ions collect, use, and disclose personal informatio n in 
the course of commercial activities. The legislatio n applies to all organizations involved in commerci al 
activities except in provinces that have adopted su bstantially similar privacy legislation, namely Alb erta, 
British Columbia, and Quebec. Even in the provinces  with substantially similar legislation, like Alber ta, 
PIPEDA continues to apply to the following organiza tions:   
• Federally regulated businesses such as banks, airli nes, and telecommunications companies  
• Organizations conducting business (involving person al information) that crosses provincial or 
national borders  
PIPA : Alberta’s Personal Information Protection Act (PIPA) regulates how private sector organizations 
collect, use, and disclose personal information in the course of commercial activities. The legislatio n is 
deemed by the federal government to be substantiall y similar to PIPEDA. The purposes of PIPA are 
summarized below:  
• It sets the requirements for the collection of indi viduals’ personal information and provides 
restrictions on its use, disclosure, retention, sto rage, and disposal 
• It balances the right of individuals to have their personal information protected with the need of 
organizations to collect, use, or disclose personal  information for purposes that are reasonable 
• It gives individuals the right to access their pers onal information held by an organization  
• It provides remedies for individuals when their per sonal information is inaccurate or incomplete  
• It stipulates recourses for actual or possible priv acy breaches and penalties for non-compliance  
 
Both PIPA and PIPEDA follow a set of principles tha t form the basis for the collection, use, and 
disclosure of personal information. Real estate pro fessionals must be familiar with these principles t o 
ensure compliance with privacy legislation. The pri vacy principles previously discussed in the 
Fundamental of Real Estate Course, are summarized b elow for application in your real estate 
professional practice. 
Principle 1: Accountability  
Real estate brokerages are responsible for managing  the clients’ personal information in their possess ion 
or custody, including personal information transfer red to a third party. Real estate professionals hav e 
custody of clients’ personal information when it is  in their possession (i.e. in their home offices, 
computers, mobile devices, portable electronic stor age devices) and are responsible for its proper 
management. Although the control of personal inform ation rests with the brokerage, which bears 
ultimate responsibility for its collection, use, di sclosure, and storage, real estate professionals ar e obliged 
to support real estate brokerages in meeting the ac countability principle. To help real estate profess ionals 
fulfill this responsibility, they must do the follo wing: 
• Comply with the brokerage’s privacy policies and pr ocedures as part of their practice 
• Know where the brokerage’s privacy policies and pro cedures are made available to the public 
• Clarify any privacy issue that is unclear with the broker, broker delegate, or Privacy Officer  
• Use appropriate security measures when transferring  personal information to third parties  
• Confirm third parties have comparable privacy polic ies and procedures to protect personal 
information being transferred  
Principle 2: Identifying Purposes 
Real estate professionals must identify the purpose  for collection of clients’ personal information be fore 
or at the time of its collection. To help real esta te professionals fulfill this responsibility, they must do 
the following:  
• Identify the need and use of the client’s personal information before, or at the time, it is collected   
• Inform clients verbally or in writing the purpose f or collecting their personal information  
• State the purpose in a clear manner and avoid using  overly broad or vague statements  
• Ensure the purpose is limited to what a reasonable person would expect in the situation  
• Identify any new purposes for collecting a client’s  personal information and obtain a new 
consent  
• Document in writing all identified purposes 
Principle 3: Consent 
Real estate professionals must obtain the clients’ informed consent to collect, use, and disclose thei r 
personal information. Obtain the clients’ consent b efore or at the time, their personal information is  
collected. When a new purpose to use the client’s p ersonal information is identified, obtain a new cli ent 
consent. Consent can be provided directly by the cl ient or through an authorized representative (e.g. 
 
PRACTICE  
TIP Privacy legislation recognizes three forms of conse nt (express, implied, or opt-out). 
Whenever possible and appropriate, real estate prof essionals should obtain express 
consent in writing. Also, provide the brokerage wit h a copy of the consent for the 
client’s file as proof that it was obtained. 
To fulfill the real estate professionals’ responsib ilities for obtaining client consent to collect, us e, and 
disclose personal information, complete the followi ng:  
• Obtain the clients’ informed consent before or when  their personal information is collected  
• Retain proof that informed consent was obtained  
• Comply with any reasonable limitations or restricti ons clients place on their consent  
• Explain the implications of clients changing or wit hdrawing their consent, subject to any legal 
or contractual restrictions  
• Obtain consent through legal and lawful means. Avoi d false, misleading, or deceptive means 
• Avoid making clients’ consent to a condition of sup plying services when it is not required for 
the provision of the services  
• Avoid asking for clients’ consent beyond what is ne eded to provide the service  
• Be familiar with the exceptions of when obtaining c onsent is not required 
 
PRACTICE  
TIP Personal information collected before privacy legis lation came into effect is 
deemed to have been collected with consent. This in formation is to be used and 
disclosed only for the original purpose that it was  collected and only if reasonable 
to meet that purpose. 
Real estate professionals must obtain a new client consent before they may use or 
disclose any information for a new purpose. 
Principle 4: Limiting Collection  
Real estate professionals must limit the collection  of clients’ personal information to only what is n eeded 
for the purpose identified. To help real estate pro fessionals fulfill this responsibility, they need t o do the 
following: 
• Collect personal information from the client direct ly, unless they have provided consent to it 
being collected from a third party  
• Collect clients’ personal information by fair and l awful means. Identify and document the type 
of personal information collected from the client f or brokerage record keeping  
Principle 5: Limiting Use, Disclosure, and Retentio n 
Real estate professionals must limit the ways they use, disclose, and retain client personal informati on. 
To help real estate professionals fulfill this resp onsibility, they need to do the following: 
• Only use or disclose the clients’ personal informat ion for the purpose it was collected and 
consent was obtained or as required by law  
• Obtain new client consent for any use or disclosure  of their personal information that is different 
than the purpose for which it was originally collec ted  
 
• Retain the clients’ personal information for only a s long as it is necessary to fulfill the purpose 
that it was collected or as required by other legis lative or contractual requirements  
Principle 6: Accuracy 
Real estate professionals must maintain clients’ pe rsonal information as required for its identified 
purpose. To help real estate professionals fulfill this responsibility, they need to do the following:  
• Keep clients’ personal information accurate, comple te, and current, taking into account its use 
and the clients’ interests 
• Refrain from routinely updating clients’ personal i nformation unless doing so is necessary to 
fulfill the purpose for which the information is co llected  
• Record the date the clients’ personal information w as updated  
 
PRACTICE  
TIP The Real Estate Act requires brokerages to retain records of actual, po tential, or 
failed real estate transactions for a minimum of 3 years after they come into 
existence. As such, real estate professionals must provide their brokerage with all 
transaction related records, including closed (i.e.  completed) and failed real estate 
trades.  
Transaction related records and documents must be p rovided in a timely manner.  
Principle 7: Safeguards 
Real estate professionals must protect clients’ per sonal information with safeguards appropriate for t he 
sensitivity of the information. To help real estate  professionals fulfill this responsibility, they ne ed to do 
the following: 
• Protect clients’ personal information against loss,  theft, unauthorized access, disclosure, 
copying, use, or modification 
• Protect clients’ personal information regardless of  what format it is held (e.g. electronic, paper) 
• Use appropriate safeguards to protect clients’ pers onal information. These safeguards include:  
- Physical measures (e.g. locked filing cabinets, res tricted access to offices, alarm 
systems) 
- Administrative measures (e.g. security clearances, staff training, agreements) 
- Technological measures (e.g. passwords, encryption,  firewalls) 
• Destroy or dispose of clients’ personal information  in a secure manner  
Principle 8: Openness 
When working with clients, real estate professional s need to be open and transparent on how their 
brokerage collects, uses, and discloses personal in formation. They need to advise their clients where 
they can access the brokerage’s privacy policy. To help real estate professionals fulfill these 
responsibilities, they need to do the following: 
• Describe the personal information held by the broke rage in their name 
• Identify the purpose for the collection of the clie nts’ personal information, how it is used, and 
to whom it may be disclosed 
 
• Provide the name, title, and contact information of  the individual responsible for the brokerage’s 
privacy policies and procedures   
• Provide information on how the client can access th eir personal information held by the 
brokerage.  
• Advise clients how they may request a correction to  their personal information 
• Advise clients where they can locate the brokerage’ s privacy policies  
Principle 9: Individual Access 
Real estate brokerages and their professionals, mus t, upon the clients’ written request, inform them o f 
the existence, use, and disclosure of their persona l information, and provide clients access to their 
information. To help real estate professionals fulf ill this responsibility, they need to do the follow ing: 
• Obtain the clients’ written request to access their  personal information (no reason is required)  
• Record the date the request is received  
• Advise clients that access is typically provided at  no cost however, they will be advised of 
estimated costs, if any, before proceeding with the  request 
• Advise clients of the exceptions to the access requ irement (e.g. if it would reveal another client’s 
personal information, if required by law, if the re quest is frivolous or vexatious)  
• Advise clients of who will be handling their reques t and that a reply may take up to 45 days 
• Provide an account of all actual or possible third parties that the client’s personal information 
has been disclosed, if disclosure has been requeste d by the client  
• Explain the clients’ right to challenge the accurac y and completeness of their personal 
information and to have it amended  
• Obtain the clients’ consent to send their amended p ersonal information to any third party that 
may have access to their information  
Principle 10: Challenging Compliance 
Real estate brokerages must develop and implement p olicies and procedures to receive and respond to 
inquiries or complaints on issues related to person al information. Although implementing this principl e 
rests with the brokerages, real estate professional s must incorporate this principle into their practi ce. To 
help real estate professionals fulfill this respons ibility, they need to do the following: 
• Follow brokerage policies and procedures for handli ng clients’ personal information  
• Be familiar with the brokerage’s website and the lo cation of its privacy policy  
• Forward all privacy-related matters, including pote ntial privacy breaches, to the individual at 
the brokerage assigned to handle such requests  
• Advise clients that the brokerage has privacy polic ies and procedures and who at the brokerage 
can handle their request or complaint  
• Keep abreast of changes made to the brokerage’s pri vacy policies and procedures 
• Ensure that any real estate assistants hired comply  with the brokerage’s privacy policies and 
procedures  
CLIENT PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY: PRACTICAL ISSUE S  
The following questions and answers relate to the p rivacy and confidentiality of client information th at 
 
professionals must be familiar with the brokerage p olicies and procedures as relates to these matters.  
1.  A long-time broker is retiring and wants to sell me  his list of clients. Some of the client 
information was collected prior to the privacy legi slation coming into force. Does the privacy 
legislation still apply?  
The client information contained in the list is leg acy information. Personal information collected 
prior to the applicable privacy legislation coming into force is deemed to have been collected with 
consent, but only for the purpose for which it was collected. In order to use legacy information for 
a new purpose, consent must be obtained from the cl ient to whom the information pertains. The sale 
of clients’ personal information is considered a ne w purpose and therefore consent would be 
required before the information can be disclosed. A ny potential purchaser of the information, 
including you, must ensure that the respective brok erage has obtained new consent for all individuals 
on the list. In order to obtain the new consent, th e brokerage must clearly state why they are seeking  
to obtain it, to whom the information would be rele ased, and the intended use of the client’s personal  
information. The answer is ‘yes’ only when all the clients on the list have provided a new consent 
to the brokerage to allow disclosure and use of the ir information. 
2.  A long-time real estate professional at my brokerag e has approached me about buying her 
client list. Should I purchase the list? 
While this may seem to be an attractive offer, ther e are a number of reasons why you should not 
purchase the list. First, the client information ty pically belongs to the brokerage, not the real esta te 
professional. Second, the client information was pr obably collected solely to facilitate real estate 
transactions. No further consent was obtained from the clients to disclose or use their personal 
information for a new purpose – the sale of their p ersonal information to you. Any potential 
purchaser of the information, including you, must e nsure that the brokerage has obtained new 
consent for all the clients on the list. In order t o obtain the new consent, they must clearly state w hy 
they are seeking to obtain the new consent, to whom  the information would be released, and the 
intended use of their personal information. Third, you may not be able to ensure the information on 
the list is accurate, relevant, or current. 
3.  I would like to buy a client list from a successful  real estate professional, to build my practice. 
Is this allowed? 
Any efforts you take to build your real estate prac tice through the purchase of a client list must tak e 
into consideration the following factors. The clien t list is typically property of the brokerage and 
was collected to facilitate real estate transaction s. No further consent was granted by the clients to  
disclose or use their personal information for anot her purpose. To purchase the list you would have 
to ensure that the brokerage has obtained new conse nt of all clients on the list. To obtain the new 
consent, the brokerage must clearly state why they were seeking the client’s consent, to whom the 
information would be released, and the intended use  of the personal information. Finally, you may 
not be able to ensure the accuracy, relevance, or c urrency of the information contained on the list. 
4.  I am transferring to another brokerage and want to take my client list with me? Can I do that? 
The client information belongs to the brokerage, no t the real estate professional. In addition, the 
clients originally provided their personal informat ion to facilitate a real estate transaction. Use of  
 
to have their information disclosed and used for an other purpose. 
5.  If I want to use the testimonials of satisfied clie nts in my marketing materials, do I need to get 
their consent? 
Obtaining clients’ consent is required in order to use their personal information, including any views  
and opinions, as part of your marketing materials. Even if you facilitated the transaction, you have 
no right to use the client’s personal information. Because all marketing and advertising is done on 
the brokerage’s behalf, the clients’ consent for th is new purpose would have to be obtained. All real 
estate trades are done for the brokerage and the cl ients are clients of the brokerage.   
6.  I want to develop a list of property owners in my a rea so I can send them my marketing 
materials. Is this allowed? 
A list of property owners may be obtained from publ ic records such as public address and telephone 
directories and online public registries. However, with Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) now 
in effect, you must first ensure that any plans to distribute your marketing materials comply with 
the requirements of the legislation. You should als o discuss this in advance with your broker. CASL 
is discussed later in this Session. 
7.  I recently held a public open house at a property. I have listed for sale and asked everyone to 
sign in as they arrived. Because they gave me their  names and contact information, can I now 
use this information to send them my marketing mate rials? 
Asking individuals who attend an open house to sign  in is usually to promote the seller’s interests 
(i.e. so you can follow-up on any interest they may  have in the seller’s property). The individuals 
who provided their personal information did so to a ccess the seller’s property, not so that you could 
send them marketing materials. If anyone who attend ed the open house asks you for follow-up 
information on the property, this is consistent wit h the purpose of the public open house. 
Personal information may be collected for marketing  purposes if its collection and its use have been 
disclosed to the individual(s) and their consent is  obtained. This requires that the open house visito rs 
clearly understand your purpose for collecting thei r personal information and that you collect only 
the information needed to send them your marketing materials. Once their personal information is 
collected, you must properly manage its privacy. In  addition, individuals must be able to withdraw 
their consent at any time from receiving your marke ting materials. Any request to withdraw consent 
(i.e. unsubscribe) must be attended to promptly by you. Furthermore, with Canada’s anti-spam 
legislation (CASL) now in effect, you must ensure t hat any plans to distribute your marketing 
materials comply with the requirements of the legis lation. If you are not sure of the requirements, 
you should discuss this with your broker. CASL is d iscussed later in this Session. 
8.  A property just sold that I had listed for sale. It  sold quickly and for a good price. Can I 
advertise the sale price of the property to generat e new business in that community?  
The sale price of the property is considered confid ential client information. Confidentiality also 
applies to commercial situations where the client m ay be a corporation. You cannot use this 
information without first obtaining the client’s co nsent to release it and explaining your intended 
use of it. Consent for release of confidential info rmation should be in writing in order to demonstrat e 
 
listings)? Can I do this? 
Real estate professionals can contact property owne rs if the information regarding their property 
having been on the market but not sold was obtained  from a source in the public domain. To be 
considered public domain, the information must be a vailable to anyone who wishes to review it. 
Examples of the public domain include public addres s and telephone directories, public 
advertisements of the property, and information con tained in a public registry. You cannot contact 
property owners if their property information was n ot available in the public domain. Keep in mind 
that much of the information you have access to as a real estate professional is not considered public  
domain. For example, you may have access to various  listing services and property databases. The 
information contained in them is typically collecte d for selling the property and should not be used 
for a different purpose such as to solicit new busi ness. With Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) 
now in effect, you must ensure that any communicati on considered to be of a commercial nature, 
complies with the requirements of the legislation. Before approaching owners whose properties were 
on the market but did not sell, consult with your b roker. CASL is discussed later in this Session. 
10.  Can I give the names of clients to service provider s (e.g. painters, cleaners, landscapers)? 
You can disclose clients’ personal information to s ervice providers as long as the clients have given 
you their prior consent to disclose their personal information and that you have clearly stated the 
purpose for this disclosure when obtaining their co nsent. It is assumed that you are providing further  
assistance to clients in meeting their needs and th at the referral is being made on behalf of the 
brokerage. Furthermore, if you expect to receive a fee, remuneration, or other benefit from a service 
provider for referring a client to them, you must d isclose this fact to the client prior to obtaining the 
consent to disclose his or her personal information  (according to section 45 of the Rules). Finally, 
with Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) now in e ffect, you must ensure that your commercial 
electronic messages as it applies to referrals comp ly with the requirements of the legislation. CASL 
is discussed later in this Session.  
11.  I want to comply with the requirements of privacy l egislation and the Rules in securing 
personal and confidential information contained in my working files. How can I secure my 
working files? 
The brokerage files you are currently using should be safeguarded and stored in accordance with 
the information protection policies and procedures of your brokerage.  
12.  I have old client files that contain confidential i nformation. How long can I keep them and 
how should I dispose of them when they are no longe r needed? 
Unless you are a broker and keeping the files on be half of the brokerage, you should not have 
possession of any old client files (i.e. those file s that are no longer your working files). Brokerage s 
are required to keep information pertaining to actu al or potential trades in real estate for a minimum  
of 3 years under the Real Estate Act . This information, however,  may be kept longer to  comply with 
other legitimate purposes or legislation (e.g. for tax purposes).  
The brokerage’s old files must be disposed of by a method that would ensure the privacy and 
confidentiality of the client information is mainta ined. For paper documents, the files could be 
 
computer memory (i.e. hard drive). 
PROTECTING CLIENT INFORMATION IN PRACTICE 
For real estate professionals, collecting, using, a nd disclosing clients’ personal and confidential 
information is part of real estate transactions and  the development of their real estate practice. How ever, 
they must also recognize the rights of clients to p rotect and control their personal and confidential 
information. The Rules (section 44), outline the re al estate professional’s obligation to protect clie nts’ 
personal and confidential information. Keeping clie nts’ personal information confidential includes the  
duty to protect it from unauthorized access, collec tion, use, disclosure, retention, disposal, loss, o r theft.  
 
PRACTICE  
TIP Because all real estate professionals must comply w ith their brokerage policies and 
procedures for protecting client information, the b rokerage should orient new real 
estate professionals to their policies and procedur es. 
 As part of their obligations under a representatio n relationship, real estate professionals must main tain 
confidentiality regarding all matters that could ad versely affect the client or could negatively impac t the 
client’s position in a trade in real estate. All in formation received from the client or obtained as a  result 
of representing a client must be kept confidential unless authorized in writing by the client or requi red 
by law. The obligation to maintain a client’s infor mation as confidential applies equally to individua l 
clients and to clients that are corporations or par tnerships. In addition, the obligation to keep clie nt 
information confidential continues after the real e state professional has ceased to provide services t o a 
client under a service agreement.  
Real estate professionals invest time in getting to  know their clients. In the process, they are often  privy 
to their clients’ financial information, personal p references, family information, employment 
information, corporate information, business plans,  assets and liabilities, and real estate plans. Cli ents 
share personal information to assist real estate pr ofessionals in meeting their real estate needs. In return, 
clients expect that the information will be kept pr ivate and confidential by their real estate profess ional. 
Therefore, it is essential that real estate profess ionals integrate privacy and confidentiality practi ces into 
their day-to-day activities to comply with legislat ive requirements and to meet client expectations. 
Privacy and Confidentiality Risks  
The Rules (section 44), state that the brokerage is  required to establish adequate policies and proced ures 
in order to protect client information, to communic ate these policies and procedures to its industry 
professionals including its employees, and to ensur e their compliance. Any changes to these policies 
and procedures must be communicated in a timely and  inclusive manner to all individuals with the 
brokerage. 
Real estate professionals need to be aware of any p otential risks inside and outside of the brokerage 
office where privacy and confidentiality of client information may be compromised. The following 
 
information: 
• Casual conversations in open areas (e.g. lunchroom,  washrooms, hallways, elevators) 
• Client-related conversations conducted in open area s or in the presence of others 
• Office design and layout   
• Contents of bulletin boards, deal boards, and broad cast emails 
• Activities in which real estate assistants handle p ersonal client information for multiple 
transactions for different real estate professional s 
• Unrestricted access to administration and conveyanc e offices and work areas 
• Unrestricted and unmonitored access to the brokerag e’s electronic and paper files 
• Use of and sharing of computer and voicemail passwo rds 
• Shared office equipment that is not password protec ted (e.g. shared fax, computer, printer) 
• Undefined home office procedures  
• Casual treatment of client files in transit (e.g. b riefcases, cars) 
• Sharing confidential information at sales meetings,  office meetings, or office social events 
Safeguarding Client Information  
Besides complying with the Rules, the applicable pr ivacy legislation, and the privacy policies and 
procedures of the brokerage, real estate profession als must implement appropriate safeguards to protec t 
client information from possible privacy breaches. Privacy breaches involve improper or unauthorized 
collection, use, disclosure, retention, or disposal  of clients’ personal and confidential information and 
may occur due to accidental or deliberate actions b y the brokerage, their real estate professionals, c lients, 
third parties, or intruders (i.e. hackers).  
 
PRACTICE  
TIP While brokerages have control over clients’ persona l information, real estate 
professionals often have custody of it. They are re sponsible for protecting all personal 
information in their custody. They have custody of personal information when it is 
held or stored by them in: 
• Home offices  
• Personal file cabinets • Personal computers  
• Mobile devices (tablets, notebooks, smart phones)  
• Vehicles and briefcases  Data storage devices (flash drives, memory sticks)  
 
The safeguards real estate professionals implement are in addition to the brokerage information barrie rs. 
These safeguards can include physical (i.e. locks),  technical (i.e. passwords), and administrative (ac cess 
limitations). Examples of these safeguards include:   
• Identify the information that is appropriate/inappr opriate to discuss at brokerage meetings  
• Do not discuss client information at industry cours es, conferences, or social events  
• Avoid private/confidential conversations in public areas where they can be overheard 
• Secure paper files from intrusion or accidental exp osure (e.g. lock file cabinets and office doors)  
• Ensure client information is not visible to others on notes, notepads, or wall/desk calendars 
• Secure business equipment from loss/theft (e.g. do not leave them in public view or unattended)  
• Ensure client information is not visible or accessi ble to others in your vehicle or home 
• Use passwords to secure electronic information from  intruders or accidental viewings  
• Use strong passwords (e.g. letters, numbers and pun ctuations) and change them periodically 
 
• Do not share passwords with others not authorized t o access client information 
• Use/update anti-virus software to protect informati on stored on computers and electronic 
devices 
• Encrypt information stored on electronic/mobile dev ices to prevent unauthorized access  
• Direct computer screens so they cannot be seen by a nyone who may be passing by 
• Delete/destroy working files after providing them t o the brokerage  
• Dispose of business papers with personal/confidenti al information using a cross-cut shredder 
• Deliver transaction documents to parties through pr oper channels, not causal arrangements  
• Report suspected or actual privacy breaches to the broker or brokerage Privacy Officer 
RECA has established guidelines to assist brokerage s with creating and maintaining information 
barriers. See Brokerage Guidelines: Confidential In formation Barriers in the Unit Appendix. 
REAL ESTATE ASSISTANTS   
Although real estate brokerages vary in size, some may hire support staff, including real estate assis tants. 
These individuals are typically unauthorized, which  means they are unlicensed and unregistered to trad e 
in real estate. They may be hired by the brokerage to help with administrative functions or general of fice 
duties in support of the day-to-day activities. In some instances, their activities may involve the pu blic, 
such as making unsolicited contact to promote the b rokerage services, or answering calls and forwardin g 
them to the real estate professionals. Brokers are responsible to monitor and supervise assistants’ 
activities when employed by, or associated with the  brokerage.  
Real estate professionals may also hire an assistan t, assuming it is done with their broker’s consent and 
according to the brokerage policies and procedures.  Activities that an assistant can perform when 
employed by a real estate professional must be admi nistrative in nature and must not require a real es tate 
authorization to perform them. The tasks assigned t o the assistant cannot involve the public, otherwis e 
they need to be employed by the brokerage.  
When real estate professionals hire an assistant, t he responsibility for the supervision of the assist ant 
and for his or her conduct shifts from that of the broker to the real estate professional. In general,  these 
responsibilities include monitoring the activities the assistant can and cannot perform and ensuring t he 
assistant complies with the brokerage policies and procedures for the protection of client information .  
To help real estate professionals supervise the act ivities conducted by their assistants and to ensure  the 
assistants protect client information, real estate professionals need to undertake the following:  
• Assign only the tasks the assistant is competent to  perform and that do not require an 
authorization to trade in real estate  
• Ensure clients, customers, the public, and other in dustry professionals know the assistant is not 
authorized to trade in real estate 
• Inform their broker or broker delegate if the assis tant’s activities are being performed 
competently and professionally 
• Ensure the assistant follows the brokerage policies  and procedures related to protecting clients’ 
personal and confidential information  
 
Some real estate professionals may consider using v irtual assistants to help them manage the day-to-da y 
work associated with their practice. Virtual assist ants are independent contractors who provide 
administrative or specialized services to real esta te professionals. They typically operate remotely w hich 
means they may be performing work for real estate p rofessionals from a location that may be local, in 
other part of the country, or even offshore. Using the services of a virtual assistant has some implic ations 
for real estate professionals. These implications r elate to the protection of their clients’ personal and 
confidential information and which must be addresse d in their practice.  
Protecting Client Information  
Real estate professionals must still comply with th e applicable privacy legislation when using a virtu al 
assistant. The real estate professional and the bro kerage remain accountable for the protection of cli ent 
information transferred to a virtual assistant. The y are also accountable when the virtual assistant i s 
handling client information. Real estate profession als, using the services of a virtual assistant, mus t 
implement the following procedures to collect or tr ansfer clients’ personal information:  
• Confirm the virtual assistant privacy policies and procedures are comparable to that of the 
brokerage  
• Notify clients whose personal information is being collected or transferred when notification 
was not included in the real estate relationship fo rm. Notification should be in writing (as 
opposed to verbal) and documented for brokerage rec ord keeping 
• Advise clients whose personal information is collec ted or transferred, how the real estate 
brokerage’s privacy policies and procedures may be obtained in writing. Also let the client know 
who can answer questions about the collection, use,  and disclosure of their personal information 
when handled by the virtual assistant  
The Rules (section 44) states that the brokerage is  required to establish adequate policies and proced ures 
to protect client information and to communicate th ese policies and procedures to its industry 
professionals and any staff (i.e. assistants) of th e brokerage. Real estate professionals need to be a ware 
of these policies and procedures so they can explai n them to the real estate assistants they employ. 
Clients’ Consent for Disclosure 
The Rules (section 44) prohibit real estate profess ionals from disclosing information about a client, 
property, or transaction to another person unless a uthorized by the client or required by law. In RECA ’s 
real estate relationship forms, brokerages, real es tate professionals registered with it, and staff em ployed 
by it must obtain the clients’ consent to collect, maintain, and disclose their personal information.  
PRACTICE  
TIP Real estate professionals who fail to provide adequ ate supervision of their assistant’s 
activities may be subject to disciplinary proceedin gs by RECA when the assistant’s 
conduct is found to be improper, unprofessional, or  unethical. 
 
written consent. This includes disclosing personal information to virtual assistants. To satisfy the 
disclosure requirement, the real estate professiona l, along with their client can consent to modify th e 
relationship agreement regarding the collection, us e, and disclosure of their personal information to 
indicate that ‘a virtual assistant employed by the real estate professional has that same consent.’  
FEDERAL ANTI-SPAM LEGISLATION 
Canada’s anti-spam legislation (CASL) came into for ce on July 1, 2014. The purpose of the legislation 
is to create a regulatory framework that combats sp am and minimizes the receipt of unsolicited 
commercial electronic messages (CEMs) whether in th e form of e-mail, text messages, social media, or 
other means of communication. In addition, it is a measure to reduce electronic threats such as spywar e, 
malware, and phishing.  
 
INFORMATION  Consumer consent is a key concept of Canada’s anti- spam legislation (CASL). The 
legislation creates a permission-based process wher e the consumer must provide 
expressed or implied consent before a commercial el ectronic message (CEM) can be 
sent. 
Spyware is software that collects information about  a user and can modify the operation of a user's 
computer without his or her knowledge or consent. M alware refers to all forms of harmful and malicious  
content, especially hostile software such as viruse s, worms, and Trojan horses. Phishing involves 
impersonating a trusted person, organization, or we bsite to steal an individual’s personal information , 
generally for the purpose of identity theft. 
Overview of Canada’s Anti-Spam Legislation  
CASL is one of the most stringent anti-spam laws in  the world due to its breadth, scope, and penalties . 
It has significantly affected the electronic commun ication practices of Canadian businesses, including  
real estate brokerages and their real estate profes sionals. As most real estate professionals use elec tronic 
messages (e.g. tweets, texts, emails, posts) to pro mote their business, they must be aware of, and com ply 
with, this legislation.  
The following information is an overview of CASL as  it applies to real estate professionals: 
• A commercial electronic message (CEM) is any messag e in electronic format (e.g. emails, text 
messages, instant messages) sent to an electronic a ddress, (e.g. email addresses, instant message 
accounts, cell phone accounts, social media account s) and encourages participation in a 
commercial activity, including, but not limited to,  offering, advertising, or promoting a product, 
service, or person 
 
EXAMPLE The following are examples of CEMs related to real estate: 
• Communicating information about a listing or a publ ic open house 
• Offering to provide real estate services  
• Sending information about new listings and market s tatistics 
• Sending articles about buying, selling, or leasing property   
• Promoting a real estate professional, including his  or her public image, as 
someone who provides any of the above activities, o r intends to do so  
• Subject to exceptions, it is a violation of CASL fo r real estate brokerages or real estate 
professionals to send CEMs to electronic accounts ( e.g. email account, cell phone account, 
social and instant messaging account) unless the re cipient’s express or implied consent to 
receive the CEM is obtained and the content of the message complies with CASL requirements  
• Expressed consent occurs when the recipient volunta rily agrees either verbally or in writing to 
receive a CEM and this consent is documented 
- Written consent includes both paper and electronic forms 
- Verbal consent can be documented by an independent third party or by an unedited 
audio recording of the recipient giving consent 
- Expressed consent cannot be hidden in an agreement,  attached to a product or service, 
or be a condition of sale 
- Expressed consent does not expire unless it is with drawn by the recipient 
• Implied consent is obtained in any of the following  situations:  
- Existing Business Relationship : The recipient and the sender (i.e. real estate 
professional) have worked together in the 2 years b efore the CEM is sent or when the 
recipient has made an inquiry about the real estate  professional’s business services 
within the previous 6 months 
- Existing Non-business Relationship : The recipient has, within the previous 2 years 
made a donation or gift, or volunteered for a regis tered charity, or been a member of a 
not-for-profit organization, such as a club or comm ittee 
- Conspicuous Publication or Disclosure of Contact In formation : The recipient 
clearly publishes or discloses their electronic con tact information without restrictions 
(e.g. opting out of receiving any unsolicited CEMs)  and the message the recipient 
receives has to do with their activities or functio ns in a business capacity  
Implied consent is generally time-limited which mea ns that it typically lasts for a period of two 
years after the event that starts the relationship (e.g. a client enters into a written service 
agreement with a real estate professional) 
• For CEMs to be CASL compliant, real estate professi onals must ensure the following 
requirements are met: 
- The recipient’s verbal, written, or implied consent  is received and retained   
- Identification information is included in the CEM. This refers to the stated purpose for 
requesting consent, the real estate professional’s name and contact information, the 
brokerage name and address, phone number, email, an d web address  
- Provide a free unsubscribe mechanism in each CEM th at allows recipients to withdraw 
their consent from receiving future communications.  The unsubscribe mechanism must 
be clearly set out and it must occur within 10 days  of the request  
 
• Instances where obtaining consent (i.e. express or implied) and complying with the form and 
content requirements for sending CEMs do not apply include the following:  
- Existing Business Relationship : The sender can send CEMs to other recipients when  
they have done business together in the two years b efore the message is sent or if the 
recipient has made an inquiry about the sender’s bu siness services within the past 6 
months  
- Existing Family/Personal Relationship : This refers to the sender having a family or 
personal relationship with the recipient (e.g. rela tionship through marriage, common 
law, or any legal parent-child relationship) and wh ere there has been direct, voluntary 
two-way communication 
- Responding to Requests : If a recipient initiates a request, inquiry or co mplaint, the 
sender can include CEMs in their response, and in f uture correspondence as the 
recipient has made initial contact 
- Enforcing a Legal Right : CEMs sent to satisfy legal obligations or to enfo rce or 
provide notice of existing or pending legal rights or actions  
• There is limited exemption from consent requirement s for third-party referrals. Consent 
requirements do not apply to the first CEM sent by an individual while contacting that individual 
following a referral by a person who has an existin g business, family, or personal relationship 
with the individual who sent the message. While the  consent requirements do not apply to the 
first CEM, the identification and unsubscribe mecha nism must be included. Furthermore, the 
CEM must disclose the full name of the individual(s ) who made the referral and state that the 
CEM is sent as a result of the referral 
• Real estate professionals who fail to comply with C ASL risk serious repercussions. They range 
from warnings to penalties such as criminal charges , civil charges, and personal liability. 
Monetary penalties can be as much as $1 million for  individuals and $10 million for businesses  
For information on CASL, see Canada’s anti-spam leg islation website, www.fightspam.gc.ca or the 
Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Co mmission website, www.crtc.gc.ca. 
 
 
SESSION OVERVIEW 
This Session focuses on client confidentiality in p ractice. It explains the duty of real estate profes sionals 
in maintaining the confidentiality of client inform ation and provides practical examples of confidenti al 
information related to the practice of residential real estate, which includes the client’s reason for  
selling/buying a property.  
This Session will explore a variety of topics relat ed to client confidentiality including: 
• How real estate professionals protect and maintain confidential client information 
• The client’s responsibilities in maintaining confid entiality  
• The need to exercise care in maintaining the confid entiality of client information 
Session Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of the Client Confidentiality in Practice Session, you will be able to: 
• Describe the real estate professional’s duty to mai ntain confidentiality of client information  
• Identify eight examples of confidential client info rmation  
• Describe how real estate professionals can protect client information  
• Identify how clients can protect and keep their inf ormation confidential  
CLIENT CONFIDENTIALITY 
Agency Law creates the obligation to protect client  information identifies the client as an individual  as 
defined by privacy legislation. All professionals ( e.g. lawyers, accountants, doctors) who provide 
services to the public have a general obligation to  keep their clients’ personal information confident ial 
and not misuse that information. The same obligatio n holds true for real estate brokerages and real es tate 
professionals.  
Trust is central to the client relationship (i.e. r epresentation relationship). Maintaining the confid entiality 
of an individual’s information is an obligation und er agency law. Broadly speaking, confidential 
information refers to information that is not readi ly accessible (i.e. secret) and possesses some sort  of 
value. Confidential information is broader than per sonal information as it also includes sensitive 
information. Typically, confidential information is  only shared with another individual or organizatio n 
to accomplish a specific purpose such as selling or  buying a property.  
Accordingly, real estate brokerages, real estate pr ofessionals, and other brokerage staff must maintai n 
confidentiality regarding all matters that could ad versely affect the client or could negatively influ ence 
the client’s position in a trade in real estate. Al l information received from the client or obtained as a 
result of representing a client must be kept confid ential unless required by law or authorized by the 
client. This obligation applies equally to individu al clients and corporations, partnerships, or other  legal 
entity clients.  
Real estate brokerages and real estate professional s have responsibilities under the Real Estate Act  Rules 
 
because the information was gained through a client  relationship. The Rules define confidential 
information as follows: 
 
DEFINITION Confidential Information  
Any information concerning the client including the  client’s financial or personal 
situation, the client’s real estate, and the transa ction involving the client.  
Maintaining Clients’ Confidential Information  
Real estate professionals often gain confidential c lient information when providing real estate servic es. 
Clients may volunteer their confidential informatio n or may provide it because of probing questions 
asked by their real estate professional. Regardless , the real estate professional must maintain the 
confidentiality of this information as an obligatio n of the representation relationship with their cli ent.  
All real estate professionals must maintain confide ntiality of their client’s information, even when a  
written service agreement is not entered into or a written service agreement has ceased. The obligatio n 
to maintain confidential client information endures  beyond the purpose of the relationship between the  
client and real estate professional and continues a fter they have ceased to provide client services un der 
a service agreement. The obligation applies regardl ess of whether or not the service agreement ceased 
by mutual termination, unilateral cancellation, ful fillment (i.e. transaction occurred), or contractua l 
expiry (i.e. the end date on the service agreement) .  
The obligation to keep client information confident ial also survives a completed real estate trade. A 
completed real estate trade refers to the successfu l sale, purchase, or lease of property. 
 
EXAMPLE Cy, a real estate professional, represents Joe in t he purchase of a house that needs 
renovating. Joe tells Cy that he plans to fix it up  for resale and make a quick profit. 
A few months later Joe lists the renovated house fo r sale with a real estate 
professional from a different brokerage. Cy is stil l obligated to maintain the 
confidentiality of Joe’s information 
The real estate professional’s obligation of client  confidentiality also applies to unsuccessful 
negotiations of offers to purchase and transactions  that fail to close even after a successful negotia tion. 
 
EXAMPLE Dale, a real estate professional, is representing K yle, who has accepted a job that 
requires him to move to another city, in the sale o f his condominium unit. The unit 
does not sell and the service agreement expires.  
Kyle then lists the property with Mac, a real estat e professional from a different 
brokerage. Dale is still obligated to maintain the confidentiality of Kyle’s information 
gained during their client relationship. 
 
EXAMPLE Di, a real estate professional, represents Sam in t he purchase of a condominium unit.  
With only a week left on his apartment lease, Sam i s quite motivated to buy a unit. 
He submits an offer to purchase with a quick posses sion date. The date is 
unacceptable to the seller and the negotiation fail s. Di is still obligated to maintain 
the confidentiality of Sam’s information. 
The confidentiality obligation also applies in circ umstances where a real estate professional has the 
potential for a client relationship. If a person co ntacts a real estate professional for the purposes of 
considering whether to enter into a service agreeme nt, but the individual does not do so, the real est ate 
professional still has a duty to maintain the confi dentiality of the individual’s information. 
 
EXAMPLE Jill who needs to sell her house to pay off a large  personal debt contacts Simone, a 
real estate professional to discuss her situation. After meeting with Simone, Jill meets 
with Ingrid, another real estate professional. Jill  chooses Ingrid to represent her in 
the sale of her property. Simone is still obligated  to maintain the confidentiality of 
Jill’s information. 
Disclosing Clients’ Confidential Information 
Although real estate professions are obligated not to disclose clients’ confidential information, ther e are 
two exceptions as indicated below: 
• When there is a legal requirement to disclose (e.g.  client is involved in unlawful activities)  
• When the client has provided them with written perm ission to disclose the information  
Real estate professionals must ensure that a client ’s consent to disclose confidential information is 
obtained freely, the client understands the advanta ges and disadvantages of disclosing the information , 
and the consent is documented in writing, and retai ned in the client’s brokerage file. The real estate  
professional must ensure that the client’s consent is informed (they understand the consequence of 
allowing the disclosure) and proof of their permiss ion to disclose is obtained for the brokerage recor ds 
(proof should be in writing, such as by email or fa x). 
Examples of Clients’ Confidential Information 
Clients may share confidential information with the ir real estate professional as a natural part of th e 
representation relationship.  Regardless of whether  the client is selling or buying a property, there is a 
variety of confidential topics that clients often d iscuss with their real estate professionals includi ng: 
For Sellers 
• The reason for the sale of the property  
• The seller’s motivation regarding the sale of the p roperty 
• The price the seller will accept for the property 
• The existence of offers received by the seller 
 
• The reason for the purchase of the property 
• The buyer’s motivation to purchase the property 
• The price the buyer will pay for the property 
• The existence of offers submitted by the buyer 
Reason to Sell/Buy:  Clients may share their reason(s) for wanting or n eeding to sell or buy a property 
to make the real estate professional is aware of th eir plans. This assists the real estate professiona l in 
determining the types of services the client may re quire.  
Motivation to Sell/Buy:  Clients may share the details around the circumstan ces that surround their 
decision to sell or buy property. This assists the real estate professional in understanding the clien ts’ 
level of motivation to conclude a property sale or purchase. 
Price to Accept/Pay:  Clients may share the specific price they will acc ept as a seller or will pay as a 
buyer for a particular property. The client, in the  process of negotiating an offer to purchase a part icular 
property, often shares this information.  
Offers Received and/or Submitted:  Clients may or may not wish their real estate profe ssional to advise 
others real estate professionals if they have recei ved (as sellers) or submitted (as buyers) offers on  a 
particular property. This may be the case when acti vity in the real estate market may result in multip le 
offers to be submitted on a particular property.  
PROTECTING CLIENT CONFIDENTIALITY IN PRACTICE 
Real estate professionals must maintain the confide ntiality of their client’s information and must not  act 
in a manner that is adverse to their clients’ inter est. The same obligation applies whether the real e state 
professional is representing the seller or the buye r. Real estate professionals must be alert to the p otential 
for others to ask questions to learn about a client ’s reason or motivation, for selling a particular p roperty. 
Real estate professionals must be alert to this pot ential. Other real estate professionals often ask t hese 
questions as much as members of the public ask them . 
Maintaining Sellers’ Confidential Information 
Real estate professionals representing sellers are often challenged in maintaining the confidentiality  of 
their sellers’ information. People are constantly a sking them why the clients are selling or how motiv ated 
they may be to sell. When representing sellers, it is critical that you do not say or do anything that  
disadvantages your client. Disclosure of the seller ’s confidential information may harm their ability to 
attract a competitive offer and price for their pro perty.  
The reason why owners sell their property can also relate to their motivation level for the sale to oc cur 
in a timely manner. A variety of circumstances caus e a seller to feel pressured or more motivated to s ell 
their property. These circumstances may include the  following: 
• The seller is divorcing and the shared residence mu st be sold to divide the assets 
• The seller is under foreclosure or judicial sale an d must sell the property to resolve a debt or 
dispute 
• The seller is relocating to a new city for work and  the property must be sold by a certain date 
 
• The seller purchased another property before sellin g the current one and must now pay the costs 
for carrying both properties  
• The seller needs to right-size their residence. For  example, empty-nesters may have a house that 
is too big for their needs, while a growing family may have a house that is too small 
The seller’s real estate professional may be tempte d to violate the seller’s confidentiality by reveal ing 
their reason or motivation in hope that it will att ract offers. There are three important reasons why this 
strategy is not in the seller’s best interests. The se reasons include: 
• If the real estate professional discloses the selle r’s reason for selling or motivation to sell, it 
clearly violates the obligation they owe their clie nt under the representation relationship 
• If the seller receives an offer to purchase that re sulted from the buyer having learned their reason 
or motivation for selling, the buyer may not intend  to pay the market value for the property as 
the buyer seeks to take advantage of the seller’s p erceived need to sell. Even through the 
negotiation process, the buyer may hold the advanta ge because of their knowledge of the seller’s 
confidential reason or motivation to sell  
• Once the seller’s reason or motivation to sell is r evealed the spread of this information is hard 
to control. The seller’s real estate professional h as no ability to take back this information, 
control who receives it, know when it may surface, or how it may be used to the seller’s 
detriment 
If the seller is truly under pressure to sell, the best marketing strategy for achieving showings and a sale 
is to price the property competitively. This means the property is asking a competitive price relative  to 
similar properties in the area for sale at that tim e. If the seller is under pressure to sell the prop erty, a 
competitive price will usually draw the attention o f buyers for showings and subsequent offers without  
compromising the confidentiality of the seller’s in formation or circumstance. 
 
INFORMATION  The Principle of Substitution states that a buyer w ill pay no more for a property than 
the cost of acquiring a similar and equally desirab le property available on the market.  
Once the seller receives an offer or multiple offer s, the seller should have the benefit of analyzing current 
market values of the properties in the area. The ra nge of values can be illustrated through a comparis on 
of the recent sale prices of similar properties in the area or areas of interest to the buyer. This ap proach 
helps the seller to understand what a competitive s ale price for their property might be. Terms and 
conditions on any offer often have financial implic ations for both the seller and the buyer. In additi on 
to considering the terms and conditions, the seller  can use the analysis of recent area sales to make an 
informed decision. 
For information on preparing the Comparative Market  Analysis (CMA), see Unit 9, Property Valuation, 
in the Fundamentals of Real Estate course.  
 
Real estate professionals representing buyers can b e challenged in maintaining buyer confidentiality, 
including the reason they are buying or their motiv ation to purchase. When representing buyers, it is 
critical that real estate professionals do not do s ay or do anything that would disadvantage their buy er. 
The disclosure of the buyer’s confidential informat ion may actually harm their ability to negotiate a 
competitive price for the purchase of a property. 
The reason buyers purchase a property can relate to  their motivation to make a purchase in a timely 
manner. A wide variety of circumstances may cause a  buyer to feel pressured or motivated, to purchase 
a property. These circumstances may include the fol lowing: 
• The buyer is divorcing, has left the shared residen ce, and wants to quickly buy elsewhere 
• The buyer has a time-limited mortgage commitment 
• The buyer is in receipt of a financial windfall tha t enables the purchase of a residence 
• The buyer faces an upcoming termination or expiry o f the residential lease agreement  
• The buyer is relocating to another city for work an d must purchase a property by a certain date 
• The buyer has serious health issues and needs a mor e appropriate residence (e.g. single-level)  
• The buyer owns a property that was sold with a quic k possession date and the buyer is now 
pressured to quickly purchase another residence 
If the buyer is truly under pressure to purchase a property, an effective strategy for the real estate  
professionals is to educate them on current market values of the properties of interest located in the ir 
sought after area(s). Illustrate this range of valu es through comparison of the recent sale prices of similar 
properties in the area(s) of interest to the buyer.   
Terms and conditions on any offer have financial im plications for both the seller and the buyer. In 
addition to reviewing the terms and conditions of t he offer, the buyer can use the analysis of recent area 
sales to understand what a competitive offer to pur chase might be. This will allow them to make an 
informed decision about any variation in the offer they may choose to make to purchase the property. 
For more information on the Comparative Market Anal ysis (CMA), see Unit 9, Property Valuation, in 
the Fundamentals of Real Estate course.  
Educating Clients to Keep their Information Confide ntial 
The obligation of real estate professionals to keep  their clients’ information confidential is clear. 
However, real estate professionals also have an obl igation to explain to their clients that it is also  
important for clients to keep their reason for sell ing and level of motivation confidential as well. I f 
clients choose to share their confidential informat ion with others, the client could jeopardize their ability 
to sell their property, damage their ability to att ract a competitive offer, or compromise their real estate 
professional’s ability to help them strategically n egotiate a transaction for their benefit. 
Some sellers or buyers freely volunteer information  to real estate professionals who do not represent 
them. The client may choose to do this as a selling  strategy to stimulate interest in the property or they 
may choose to do this to increase their appeal as a  prospective buyer. Clients can volunteer their 
confidential information to other real estate profe ssionals simply because they do not understand that  
 
because: 
• They lack an understanding of the selling process  
• They lack an understanding of the buying process 
• If they are a seller, they have the mistaken belief  that compensation is tied to representation (i.e. 
if the seller is paying the commission to their bro kerage and the buyer’s brokerage, they might 
conclude that the buyer’s brokerage is also be work ing for the seller.)  
Clients need to understand that only their real est ate professional represents them. Other real estate  
professionals do not represent them and have no obl igation to maintain their confidentiality. Other re al 
estate professionals have an obligation to share an y relevant information they acquire from others in the 
course of a transaction with their clients. Clients  should be aware that any relevant information gain ed 
by other real estate professionals could be used to  their own client’s advantage. This circumstance co uld 
easily occur when the potential for an offer to pur chase may exist. 
Other real estate professionals may attempt to enga ge a seller or a buyer in conversation in order to gain 
information of a confidential nature that would be beneficial to their client. This is especially true  when 
there is potential for an offer to purchase on the property. A seller’s real estate professional may a ttempt 
to engage a buyer in conversation to gain confident ial information beneficial to their seller. 
Alternatively, a buyer’s real estate professional m ay attempt to engage a seller in conversation to ga in 
confidential information that would be beneficial t o their buyer. On occasion, clients leave confident ial 
information visible. This oversight can applies to sellers in particular. 
Examples of sellers revealing confidential informat ion to buyers include : 
 
EXAMPLE Sara, a real estate professional, represents Winnie , who wants to purchase a larger 
residence. Today, they are viewing the estate resid ence of Lisa who is home during 
the showing of her property.  Sara asks Lisa a few questions about the property 
including her reason for selling such a lovely hous e. Flattered, Lisa admits that she is 
only selling because her recent divorce has left he r unable to financially handle the 
property on her own and bills are piling up. Sara t ells Winnie about Lisa’s reason and 
motivation for selling her property. Later that day , Winnie submits an offer to 
purchase Lisa’s property. She uses the information about Lisa’s reason and 
motivation for selling to her advantage when drafti ng the offer to purchase. 
 
 
EXAMPLE Cindy, a real estate professional, represents Wayne  who is looking to purchase a 
house in Upton. The market in Upton is slow with a number of properties on the 
market and limited sales (i.e. buyers’ market).  
Today she is showing Wayne several properties, incl uding the Crombie residence 
that has been for sale more than 4 months. As they are standing in the kitchen 
admiring the large eating area, Cindy notices in fu ll view on the kitchen table an 
accepted purchase contract related to the Crombie’s  purchase of a large house in a 
nearby town. They complete the showing and proceed to the next property. The next 
day Wayne decides to submit an offer on the Crombie  residence. Wayne asks Cindy 
why she thinks the Crombie’s are selling. Cindy tel ls Wayne about the purchase 
contract she saw in plain view on their kitchen tab le that indicated they may have 
 
motivation to sell, especially in the current slow market. As a result, Wayne uses this 
information to his advantage when drafting his offe r to purchase the Crombie’s 
residence 
Examples of buyers revealing confidential informati on to sellers include : 
 
EXAMPLE  Slim, a real estate professional representing the s eller, is holding a public open house 
at the seller’s residence. Janice, an unrepresented  buyer, attends the open house. 
Janice tells Slim about her recent large inheritanc e, which enables her to purchase a 
house without the need for financing. She also tell s Slim that she is currently renting 
a small townhouse nearby and is only looking for a house in this neighbourhood 
because she wants her two children to be able to st ay in school they currently attend. 
If Janice takes an interest in the property, Slim m ust share Janice’s confidential 
information with his client. 
Clients should be aware of the disadvantages of vol unteering their reason or motivation for selling a 
property to real estate professionals who do not re present them. From the clients’ perspective, this a lso 
applies to clients represented by other real estate  professionals. Clients should not succumb to any 
attempts by other real estate professionals or thei r clients to engage them in conversations that are of a 
personal or confidential nature. This includes ques tions probing for the reasons behind selling or buy ing 
or the level of motivation to achieve a property sa le or purchase. This comment does not refer to 
questions of a non-personal or non-confidential nat ure, such as aspects of a property. Clients may als o 
refer property-related questions to their real esta te professional for a response.  
The disadvantages to clients of volunteering their confidential information include the following: 
• Real estate professionals, other than the real esta te professional representing the seller or buyer, 
are under no obligation to keep this information co nfidential 
• Confidential information that clients reveal to oth er real estate professionals may ultimately 
disadvantage them in their ability to negotiate the  best terms and conditions in the sale or 
purchase of the property 
 
EXAMPLE  Lou, a real estate professional, represents Jake in  the sale of his residence. This 
weekend Lou is holding a public open house at Jake’ s property and Mike, a 
prospective buyer, stops by to view the property. L ou introduces himself. Mike 
shares with Lou the fact that he has just been tran sferred to the city and is only in 
town this weekend. He must buy a house for his fami ly before he leaves town. Later 
that day, Mike contacts his real estate professiona l, Murray, about Jake’s property 
and meets with Murray to submit an offer to purchas e. Lou tells Jake about Mike’s 
reason and motivation to buy his property. As a res ult, Jake uses this information to 
his advantage during the negotiation. During the ne gotiation, Murray learns Mike 
told the seller’s real estate professional how he w as under pressure to purchase a 
property this weekend. Mike’s disclosure of this in formation makes it difficult for 
Murray to help Mike negotiate the offer to his adva ntage. 
  
 
the client’s real estate professional in doing thei r best efforts on behalf of the client  
Some clients may choose to reveal their own confide ntial information. If the client chooses to disclos e 
confidential information after their real estate pr ofessional has explained the disadvantages of doing  so, 
document the discussion with the client and the cli ent’s decision. Retain any topical or relevant writ ten 
communications and make notes in the client’s broke rage file.  
Documenting the discussion and the client’s decisio n to disclose will provide proof that the discussio n 
occurred and that the client made an informed decis ion to proceed contrary to the advice of their real  
estate professional. Public awareness of why the cl ient is selling or buying, the client’s motivation to 
sell or buy, the price the client will accept or pa y, and details of any offers received or submitted was 
not the result of the real estate professional fail ing to protect the client’s confidential informatio n. The 
client made an informed decision not to protect the ir information, and therefore, not to protect 
themselves and their best interest in the potential  sale or purchase of property. 
MAINTAINING CLIENT CONFIDENTIALITY IN PRACTICE 
Real estate professionals work with other real esta te professionals to facilitate transactions between  their 
respective clients. Although cooperation and courte sy among real estate professionals is necessary to 
facilitate transactions for the benefit of their re spective clients, real estate professionals must ma intain 
their clients’ confidentiality reason for selling o r buying property or their motivation to make the s ale or 
purchase. This is the case unless the client specif ically permits these disclosures.  
In the course of practice, there are frequent occas ions to interact with other real estate professiona ls. 
Some occasions may lead to inadvertent disclosure o f client information unless you exercise precaution . 
Real estate professionals should be weary of this p otential and maintain their clients’ confidentialit y. 
Examples of inadvertent disclosure are described be low. 
Brokerage Meetings: Most brokerages hold periodic sales meeting. During  these occasions, real estate 
professionals may discuss new properties listed for  sale as well as their recent sales. Caution is adv ised 
in disclosing the reason or motivation of the selle rs or buyers having listed or sold. Discussing the 
property description and its advantages should be t he focus of conversation among colleagues, as 
opposed to a discussion about any client’s confiden tial information.  
Real Estate Open Houses: Some real estate professionals hold open houses to p rovide other real estate 
professionals with the opportunity to preview these  properties. This type of open house is more common  
during slower markets (i.e. buyers’ market) and are  often held on weekdays. Real estate professionals 
can preview properties on behalf of their buyer cli ents or on behalf of their current or potential sel ler 
clients. The hosting real estate professional may a sk for the opinion of those viewing about the prope rty 
or its asking price (i.e. list price). These questi ons are asked to provide feedback to their seller c lient. 
Exercise caution as attending real estate professio nals may have potential buyers for some of the 
properties they have chosen to preview.  
Public Open Houses:  Real estate professionals may also attend public o pen houses.  This type of open 
house is often held on weekends. Real estate profes sionals usually preview open house properties on 
behalf of their current or prospective buyer or sel ler clients. For example, real estate professionals  
preview properties to become familiar with properti es for sale in areas of interest to their buyers or  to 
 
professional for their opinion on the property or i ts asking price (i.e. list price). The host is aski ng these 
questions in order to provide feedback to their sel ler client. However, attending real estate professi onals 
may have potential buyers for some of the propertie s they have chosen to preview.  
Property Tours: From time to time, real estate professionals may or ganize a tour of properties they 
have listed for sale located in the same area or ne ighbourhood.  This type of event is more common 
during a slower market (i.e. buyers’ market). The p articipating real estate professionals have propert ies 
on the tour and often seek feedback from their coll eagues regarding their respective properties. Prope rty 
feedback is typically gathered and shared with resp ective sellers. Although no buyers are involved in 
these tours, caution should be exercised as partici pating real estate professionals may have potential  
buyers for some of these properties. 
Property Viewings:  Clients may seek feedback or share feedback regardi ng the viewing (showing) of 
a particular property. Sellers typically like to ha ve their real estate professional attempt to get fe edback 
from the buyer’s real estate professional as to wha t the buyer thought of their property. However, 
feedback provided by the buyer to their real estate  professional is confidential. Although the seller’ s real 
estate professional may ask for feedback on behalf of their client, the buyer’s real estate profession al 
should not share any feedback without their client’ s permission. This is not being discourteous; it is  
being compliant with the obligations of a represent ation relationship. It is also prudent. Should the buyer 
take an interest in a property where feedback was r evealed, it may disadvantage the buyer in negotiati on 
for the property. For example, a buyer may share wi th their real estate professional that they really like 
a property and it fits their need perfectly. If the  buyer’s real estate professional shares this infor mation 
with the seller’s real estate professional, it may disadvantage the buyer in their negotiations if the y 
 
In summary, real estate professionals must maintain  the confidentiality of their clients’ information.  
Because real estate professionals are acting in the ir clients’ best interest, they must also help thei r clients 
protect their confidential information. This includ es why the client is selling or buying, their level  of 
motivation to achieve a sale or purchase, and the n umber or details of offers they have received or 
submitted. Real estate professionals must explain t he importance of keeping information confidential. 
This can be facilitated by real estate professional s providing examples that may help clients understa nd 
when, where, and how their confidential information  may be exposed to others.  
Real estate professionals must also ensure that cli ents understand who represents them in the potentia l 
or actual real estate transaction and who does not.  Real estate professionals should explain what to 
expect in the selling and buying process and how th ey can anticipate or better ascertain potential iss ues 
regarding their confidential information. Assisting  clients to be better informed helps real estate 
professionals provide competent services while acti ng in the clients’ best interest.  
 
 
 
SESSION OVERVIEW 
When providing services to the public, real estate professionals will work with a variety of individua ls 
or entities. In doing so, they must make a concerte d effort to know their client and to understand the ir 
needs and wants in relation to the real estate tran saction. 
This Session will explore a variety of topics relat ed to knowing your client including: 
• Getting to know your client 
• Identifying type of client or entity you are workin g with 
• How the client type can impact the sale or purchase  of a property 
Session Learning Objectives 
Upon completion of the Client Confidentiality in Practice Session, you will be able to: 
• Differentiate between individual consumers and inve stors in a real estate transaction  
• Explain how client types impact a real estate trans action  
• List the reasons a property may be the subject of a  judicial sale 
• Explain the foreclosure process as it relates to th e practice of residential real estate 
REAL ESTATE CLIENTS 
Real estate clients expect that they will receive c ompetent service from their real estate professiona l. In 
order to provide clients with competent service, re al estate professionals must understand the client’ s 
objective, and their specific needs and wants in re lation to the transaction. This information will he lp 
real estate professionals determine the due diligen ce activities they should perform on behalf of each  
client.  
Besides the desire of real estate professionals to provide competent service, there are several other 
reasons why they should get to know their clients a nd what their real estate objectives may be. This 
necessitates knowing the identity of the prospectiv e or actual client and having accurate contact 
information for that individual. In addition, Finan cial Transactions and Reports Analysis Centre of 
Canada (FINTRAC) requires that the identity of clie nts be verified to comply along with Canada’s other  
legislation, The Proceeds of Crime (Money Launderin g), and Terrorist Financing Act  (PCMLTFA).  
Objectives of the client must also be clear. Any ef fort by clients to avoid forthright answers to 
straightforward questions or their provision of ina ccurate information can imply that the client inten ds 
to participate in a questionable transaction. A que stionable transaction may be one that involves 
mortgage fraud, illicit funds, or organized crime. Most real estate professionals never encounter 
unsavoury clients or suspicious transactions. Howev er, being aware of these situations can help to 
prevent them.  
It is important to get to know your seller and buye r as these clients are the traditional parties to a  real 
 
encounter in their practice.  
The next section describes some of these client typ es. Most of the client types below describe sellers  or 
buyers in a real estate transaction. The objective and motivation to enter into or conclude a transact ion 
vary as much as their service needs and expectation s.  
Individual Consumers  
For most consumers, the sale or purchase of real es tate is a significant financial and emotional decis ion. 
Many consumers have long delays between their need for real estate services, while others may need 
these services more often. Even when a consumer has  previous experience selling or buying a residence,  
the real estate professional should never assume th at the consumer has knowledge of current market 
conditions or current real estate contracts upon wh ich a transaction is based.  Consumers are unaware 
of what they do not know; essentially, they don’t k now what they don’t know. Clients rely on their rea l 
estate professional to educate them and to keep the m informed. 
Real estate professionals need to be make new consu mer contacts and meet prospective clients in order 
to build their residential practice. They often par ticipate in events or activities, while entering in to casual 
discussion to build rapport and trust. To attract s eller and buyer inquiries they may also undertake 
focused and purposeful activities. Both types of co nsumer interactions may lead to a working 
relationship and ultimately a client relationship f or the purposes of selling or buying property. Once  this 
relationship is established, the real estate profes sional’s skill and expertise is utilized to guide t he 
consumer through the selling or buying process. Thi s process may include the following activities: 
• determining the consumer’s needs and wants 
• determining the consumer’s motivation and financial  ability 
• presenting and discussing relevant information 
• completing contracts, obtaining signatures, negotia ting offers 
• closing the transaction 
Real estate professionals must work on behalf of th e clients they represent to achieve a transaction t hat 
optimally meets the client’s needs and wants. They must provide their clients with all available optio ns 
including the advantages and disadvantages, negotia te the best price and terms, prioritize their clien ts' 
best interests, follow the clients’ informed direct ion, and use their expertise and training to expedi te as 
smooth and beneficial a transaction as possible. Wh en compromises are made or alternate options 
chosen, they are done with the clients’ informed co nsent based on a clear understanding of the 
advantages, disadvantages, options, and consequence s of the decision. Sellers and buyers expect real 
estate professionals to have a level of knowledge a nd expertise that provides them with competent 
service and a successful transaction. 
The courts recognize the special expertise of real estate professionals will hold them to the highest 
standard of duty and professionalism towards the se ller and buyers they represent. Acting professional ly 
will protect the brokerage and the real estate prof essional and provides the high standard of service 
 
Unlike traditional residential real estate sellers and buyers, investors are not seeking to sell or bu y 
properties where they can reside. They are seeking properties that can meet their investment objective s. 
They are looking to sell and buy property to genera te a profit, diversify their portfolio, and/or prov ide a 
stable source of income for themselves or their com pany.  
Real estate as an investment involves the sale, pur chase, ownership, management, and rental of propert y 
with the intention to accumulate wealth, produce in come, or make a profit. Investors have less of an 
emotional connection to an investment property or r eal estate transaction than the typical consumer wh o 
may be selling or buying a property in which to res ide.  
Real estate professionals who represent clients int erested in real estate investment opportunities wil l 
need to respond to the varied objectives, needs, an d wants of the investor. Some investors may seek a 
regular flow of income, while others may seek capit al appreciation, or potential tax benefits from the ir 
property investment. Some investors purchase or sel l one property at a time as they may be doing the 
improvements to the property themselves. Other inve stors build and maintain portfolios of properties o r 
may have other professionals, such as licensed prop erty managers to assist them. It is important to 
understand the investment objectives of these clien t types, as some seek profit through the purchase a nd 
subsequent sale of the residential property (i.e. p roperty flips), while others build cash flow throug h the 
ongoing operation of revenue properties (i.e. prope rty rentals).  
Specialized knowledge may be required to assist rea l estate investor clients with their objectives and  
provide them with competent service. This knowledge  may include financial information, including 
financial analyses, taxation legislation, plus a co mprehensive understanding of risks and returns rela tive 
to investment properties. Some investors may have a dvisors who assist them with this information, whil e 
others may not. As such, real estate professionals need to be aware of the key differences between 
investor clients. 
• Investor Type:  You must be able to identify the type of investor that you are working with. For 
example, is it the investor’s intention to purchase  a property requiring renovations that they 
intend to do themselves, and then resell the proper ty for a profit? Or, does the investor intend to 
buy a property for the long term in order to produc e a consistent and positive cash flow? 
• Investor Objectives:  Real estate professionals need to understand the c lient’s investment 
strategy, objectives, and time horizon (short-term or long-term) in order to meet their objectives 
• Investor Terminology:  Real estate professionals need to know and explain  the different terms 
that investors use (e.g. cash flow, occupancy rate,  vacancy rate, gross income) 
• Investor Valuations:  Real estate professionals should be able to prepar e and explain property 
valuations for revenue properties. This includes kn owing which method of income analysis to 
apply, such as capitalization rate, gross income mu ltiplier, or monthly rental factor. This 
information was explained in Unit 9, Property Valua tion, of the Fundamentals of Real Estate 
course.  
Powers of Attorney  
A client may be selling or buying real estate on be half of another individual based on a Power of 
Attorney (POA). This legal document enables an indi vidual to appoint another person to act on his or 
her behalf with respect to their financial and lega l affairs including debts. The Power of Attorney ma y 
 
• Attorney : the person(s) appointed to act on the donor’s beh alf  
• Witness : the person who is present when the POA is created  and signs the document to confirm 
its authenticity and legality 
In Alberta, matters related to Powers of Attorney a re legislated by the Powers of Attorney Act. The 
requirements that create a valid POA include the fo llowing:  
• The donor must be at least 18 years old  
• The POA must be written, dated, and signed by both the donor and witness in each other’s 
presence  
• The donor at the time of signing, must be mentally capable of understanding the nature and 
effect of the POA, otherwise it will be void 
In addition, certain individuals cannot act as witn esses to a POA. These individuals include: 
• Anyone under the age of 18 
• Anyone who is mentally incapacitated  
• The person being named as the attorney  
• The spouse or adult interdependent partner of the d onor 
• The person who signed the POA on behalf of the dono r 
• The person or the adult interdependent partner of t he person who signed the POA on the donor’s 
behalf  
The attorney appointed to act on the donor’s behalf  does not have to reside in Alberta. In addition, t he 
donor can appoint more than one person to act as at torney and the appointment can be a person, financi al 
institution, or both. On the appointment of more th an one attorney, the POA must specify how the 
attorneys can make decisions. The donor can require  attorneys when making decisions, to act jointly or  
to act severally and jointly. When acting jointly, the attorneys must act together, all agree to any d ecision, 
and must all sign all documents together. The phras e severally and jointly allows any of the attorneys  to 
be able to act individually on the donor’s behalf a nd sign documents together or without the others. 
Types of Powers of Attorney  
A Power of Attorney (POA) may be special or limited  to one specified act or type of act, or it may be 
general and whatever it defines as its scope is wha t a court will enforce. A POA may also be limited a s 
to time. Regardless of the type of POA, it is only effective for as long as the donor is alive. Upon t he 
donor’s death, his or her Will, if one exists, take s effect. In Alberta, the common types of Powers of  
Attorney include the following: 
General Power of Attorney: A General Power of Attorney has no limits on the po wers of the attorney 
to make decisions about the donor’s financial and l egal affairs. The attorney can make all decisions a nd 
do all the things that the donor is able to make or  do had he or she been present. The one exception i s 
decisions about the donor’s personal affairs such a s, consenting to health care or deciding where the 
donor should reside. The types of activities identi fied in a General POA may include the following: 
• Paying bills 
• Conducting banking transactions 
• Making investment decisions 
 
Special Power of Attorney: A Special Power of Attorney grants specific or limi ted powers to the 
attorney to make certain decisions or act on the do nor’s behalf. A Special POA is also be referred to as 
a Limited Power of Attorney. In Alberta, a POA that  specifies land, is a Special Power of Attorney and  
has the effect of suspending the owner’s (i.e. dono r) right to deal with the land when the POA is 
registered on the Certificate of Title. An example of a Special POA as it relates to land is when an o wner 
is out of the country for an extended period of tim e and in their absence, grants the attorney authori zation 
to sign documents related to the sale or mortgage o f real property. In another example, a Special POA 
may grant limited authority for the attorney to ove rsee specific matters such as the sale of a particu lar 
property as opposed to all of the owner’s property.  
Immediate Power of Attorney : An immediate Power of Attorney appoints an attorney  to make 
financial and legal decisions on behalf of the dono r and takes effect as soon as the POA is dated, sig ned, 
and witnessed. This type of POA terminates upon the  donor’s loss of mental capacity or death. 
Enduring Power of Attorney: An enduring Power of Attorney appoints an individua l to make financial 
and legal decisions on behalf of the donor and take s effect upon any of the following: 
• Immediately upon it being dated, signed ,and witnes sed and continues if the donor becomes 
incapable of managing his or her financial and lega l affairs; or,  
• When the donor becomes mentally incapacitated; or,  
• When some other event specified by the donor occurs  sometimes referred to as a Springing POA  
In order for a POA to be enduring, it must state wh ether it is to take effect immediately and continue  
upon the mental incapacity of the donor, or only ‘s pring’ into effect upon future mental incapacity or  
some other event stated by the donor. If it does no t include such a statement, it is not an Enduring P ower 
of Attorney and terminates if the donor becomes men tally incapacitated. 
Transactions Involving Powers of Attorney  
Alberta’s Land Titles Act authorizes an owner of land to grant a Power of Att orney whereby a person 
(i.e. attorney) is appointed to act on behalf of th e owner (i.e. donor) with respect to dealings with his or 
her land (i.e. real property). Under the legislatio n, a form is prescribed, (Form 20) however, it is n ot 
mandatory for the specific form to be used. The leg islation states that a POA may be in the prescribed  
form, or as near to it as circumstances permit. A P OA that specifically refers to the ability to deal with 
land is considered a Special Power of Attorney and must be registered on the property’s Certificate of  
Title in order for the attorney to be able to act o n the owner’s behalf. Upon registration of a Specia l POA 
on the property title, the rights of the owner (i.e . donor) to deal with the land is suspended until i t is 
revoked and discharged from the property’s Certific ate of Title.  
Real estate professionals may work with individuals  who are acting on behalf of another in a transacti on 
by virtue of an executed POA. In these situations, real estate professionals must perform the followin g 
due diligence activities:  
• Read the POA carefully to ensure it has been validl y executed 
• Confirm the identity of the individual named as the  attorney 
• Verify that the donor is still alive otherwise the attorney does not have the authority to act 
 
of Title and can act on the donor’s behalf in the r eal estate transaction 
Client discussions and a title search will reveal t he involvement of the individual as an attorney und er 
the POA. The real estate professional must confirm the client’s authority to act as attorney by reques ting 
and reviewing a copy of the POA. Document your disc overy related to the Certificate of Title and your 
review of the POA for the brokerage client file. Re view of the document serves three key functions:  
• It provides proof of the client’s role as an attorn ey under the POA  
• It confirms if the client has the right to contract  on behalf of the donor in the real estate 
transaction 
• It sets out the client’s responsibilities and the r equirements they must meet while fulfilling their 
role under the POA 
Real estate professionals should ask questions abou t and expect honest and informative answers for use  
of the POA. Furthermore, real estate professionals need to exercise caution when working with POA 
documents as they can be used to perpetrate fraud. Examples include the following:  
• An individual who is appointed as attorney by his o r her spouse sells property that is owned 
jointly by them without the knowledge or consent of  the spouse and keeps the proceeds from 
the sale  
• An individual who is appointed as an attorney for a n elderly or incapacitated parent sells the 
parent’s property without their knowledge and keeps  the proceeds for their own benefit 
• A fraudulent POA is prepared for a fictitious perso n, presented as a valid legal document, and 
is used in a real estate transaction  
• A fraudulent POA is prepared with an individual’s s tolen identity and forged signature, and is 
used in a real estate transaction 
When acting as attorney under a POA, the client may  require assistance from others in fulfilling their  
respective duties and responsibilities. To assist y our clients, real estate professionals should ensur e all 
terms or conditions included in a purchase contract  allow sufficient time for the client or others (e. g. 
lawyer, accountant, lender) to complete or perform the specified activities. Also, provide the client with 
the required information, advice, or approval. Term s and conditions are discussed later in this course . 
If at any time real estate professionals have suspi cions or doubts that a Power of Attorney is used 
fraudulently, they should refrain from proceeding w ith the transaction, document the reasons for their  
suspicions, and contact their broker. To comply wit h the Rules regarding record keeping, provide an 
original or copy of the POA for the brokerage file.    
Trustees  
A trustee is a person appointed by legal agreement (the Trust) to hold assets for the benefit of one o r 
more persons (the beneficiaries). A trust agreement  sets out the terms of the trust and the trustee’s powers 
and duties. When a person lacks the capacity to man age their estate, which may include ownership of 
real property, a trustee may be appointed under the  Adult Guardianship and Trusteeship Act . In 2009, 
this statute replaced the Dependent Adults Act . For additional information on trustees, see the A lberta 
Justice and Solicitor General website, www.justice. alberta.ca. 
A trustee may be granted decision-making authority to manage the financial affairs of the represented 
 
duty to account to the court and maintain detailed records of all transactions. A trustee can be an 
individual over 18 years of age, a trust company, o r the Public Trustee. There is no requirement for t he 
trustee to live in Alberta or Canada.  
The trustee’s powers to deal with the property of t he represented adult is restricted by the court ord er 
appointing the trustee or, in its absence, by the a pplicable legislation. Orders made regarding truste es 
under the applicable legislation should be register ed on the title of the property.  
The Court of Queen’s Bench of Alberta may appoint a  trustee when creditors make an order or a person 
files an assignment in bankruptcy. Once an order or  assignment is granted, the represented adult canno t 
dispose of or deal with their property. The real pr operty vests in the trustee, who may sell, lease, o r 
otherwise dispose of part or all of the property. U nder the Land Titles Act  (section 128), the trustee is 
deemed to be the absolute owner of the land and is shown as owner on the Certificate of Title. By 
contrast, a guardian is a court-appointed person ac ting on behalf of a represented adult. Typically, a  
guardian does not have the legal authority to manag e or make decisions related to the purchase or sale  
of real estate and would not be registered on the C ertificate of Title. 
When real estate professionals represent a client w ho is acting as a trustee in a transaction, they mu st 
obtain a copy of the legal document appointing the person as trustee. This will verify that it has bee n 
properly executed, identify who the representative is, and the legal authority granted to the trustee to act 
on the represented adult’s behalf. In addition, rea l estate professionals must conduct a title search 
through SPIN to confirm that the person appointed a s trustee appears on the Certificate of Title. This  
will confirm that the trustee is granted authority to make decisions regarding the property. Keep a co py 
of the legal document appointing the trustee in the  brokerage file as required by the Rules regarding 
brokerage record keeping. 
Executors  
An executor is a person named in a Will appointed t o administer the distribution of an estate for a 
deceased individual. The executor is appointed by t he testator of the Will (i.e. individual who made t he 
Will) or by the court if there was no prior appoint ment. Executors are responsible for administering t he 
estate of the deceased as directed by the Will. The  estate includes everything owned by the deceased, 
including real estate owned outright and real estat e owned as a tenant in common. It does not, however , 
include real estate owned in joint tenancy. When mo re than one executor is named, decisions require al l 
executors to agree. The term executor is commonly u sed in Alberta, but the role may also be referred t o 
as an administrator, personal representative, or ex ecutrix (if female).  
The executor is responsible for ensuring that all t he assets of the deceased’s estate are accounted fo r, all 
the debts of the deceased are paid off, including t axes, and for selling or transferring assets of the  estate 
among the beneficiaries (i.e. the individuals named  in the Will to receive a share of the estate). The  
executor is legally obligated to honour the wishes and to act in the interests of the deceased . In ad dition, 
the executor is accountable to the beneficiaries an d must keep records of all transactions and provide  
the beneficiaries with a final statement of account .  
Under the Land Titles Act , when the owner of land for which a Certificate of  Title is granted dies, the 
land vests in the executor of the deceased. The exe cutor must apply to be registered as the owner on t he 
 
owner for the purpose of registered dealings with t he land.  
When real estate professionals represent a client a cting as an executor in a transaction, they must ob tain 
a copy of the legal document appointing the person as executor. The document should verify that it has  
been properly executed, identify the executor, and confirm legal authority granted to the individual. Real 
estate professionals must conduct a title search th rough SPIN to confirm that the person appointed as 
executor appears on the Certificate of Title. This will confirm that the executor is granted the autho rity 
to make decisions regarding the property. Keep a co py of the legal document appointing the executor in  
the brokerage file as required by the Rules regardi ng brokerage record keeping.  
A client appointed as executor may require the advi ce, assistance, approval, or involvement of others 
before making decisions related to the transaction.  Examples of when this may occur include:  
• Decisions of the executor subject to review by an e state lawyer or an accountant  
• Decisions of the executor that require discussions with or agreement of the beneficiaries 
• Decisions that require joint agreement by multiple executors  
To assist clients acting in the capacity as an exec utor, real estate professionals should ensure all t erms 
or conditions included in a real estate purchase co ntract allow sufficient time for the client or othe rs (e.g. 
lawyer, accountant, beneficiaries) to complete or p erform the specified activities. Also, provide the 
client with the required information, advice, or ap proval. Terms and conditions are discussed later in  
this course. 
Assignees/Assignors  
In relation to real estate, an assignee is a person  to whom an interest or right in real property is l egally 
transferred. An assignor is the person who transfer s a right or interest in real property. An assignme nt is 
a legal sales transaction whereby the original buye r (i.e. the Assignor) of a property sells, and ther eby 
transfers, his or her interest and obligations unde r the original contract to a new buyer (i.e. the As signee) 
prior to the transaction being completed. The assig nee assumes all of the assignor's rights and obliga tions 
under the original contract. Upon completion of the  real estate transaction, the assignee is granted t itle 
to the property and will incur all final closing co sts. An assignment is an agreement that transfers a n 
interest in land, therefore under the Statute of Fr auds, it must be in writing and signed by the parti es 
involved or by other persons lawfully authorized to  sign on their behalf. 
In residential real estate, contract holders may as sign leases, new home sales agreement, or purchase 
contracts to other individuals and entities. Genera lly, all contracts are assignable unless specifical ly 
prohibited by law or by the terms of the contract. Real estate professionals must read the contract to  
verify whether an assignment is permitted and the r equirements for an assignment to occur. 
Corporations  
Corporations may be involved in real estate transac tions. In order for an entity to be incorporated in  
Alberta, it must meet a number of legislative requi rements set out by the provincial government. Once 
all the requirements for incorporation have been me t, a Certificate of Incorporation is issued as proo f 
that the registration has occurred. As a legal enti ty, a corporation has all the rights, powers, and p rivileges 
 
of Incorporation.  
 
INFORMATION  Articles of Incorporation set out the structure and  basic governance of the company, 
including the legal name and address of the busines s, class of shares, number of 
directors, and any restrictions or provisions compl ied with by the corporation.  
A corporate seal is the official mark or signature of a corporation and consists of an embossed impres sion 
on paper, evidencing the formality of the corporati on's execution of a document. While a corporation 
may choose to use its seal on legal documents, it i s not a requirement. However, any contract executed  
on behalf of a company under its corporate seal sho uld indicate the authority of the person signing by  
inserting that person’s position above his or her s ignature. If a corporate seal is not used, the foll owing 
words should be used, “I have the authority to bind  the corporation .” 
When real estate professionals represent a party ac ting for a corporation, extra care and attention is  
required to ensure the corporation exists, the indi vidual has the authority to enter into contracts on  behalf 
of the corporation, and the corporation itself has the right to sell, purchase, or lease property. Rea l estate 
professional must ensure that the party they repres ent understands that a corporate seal is equivalent  to 
the signature of a person and that by signing; the parties are bound by the terms of the contract. Onc e 
this discussion has occurred, the real estate profe ssional should obtain the party’s lawful instructio ns on 
how to proceed.  
Real estate is one of several business sectors at r isk for money laundering. Criminals use real estate  
transactions to obscure the source of funds and hid e asset ownership. As part of the federal governmen t’s 
detection and deterrence legislation against money laundering and terrorist financing, real estate 
professionals are required to confirm the existence  of all corporations or other legal entities in the  
following instances:  
• When the legal entity is a client in a purchase or sale of real estate 
• When the legal entity provides funds in any amount or form as part of a real estate transaction 
To verify registration of the corporation, real est ate professionals must order a corporate search thr ough 
Service Alberta’s Corporate Registry. When the sell er is a corporation, a title search is completed to  
ensure proper spelling of the corporation’s name. C orrect spelling of the corporation’s name is requir ed 
to complete a search in the Corporate Registry. Alb erta registry agents, law offices, and other servic e 
providers can perform this search. Search results p rovide public record information, including 
corporation’s name, address, status (i.e. active, i nactive, or dissolved) and director and shareholder  
names and addresses. Real estate professionals must  obtain written documentation from the directors of  
the corporation indicating that the person acting o n the corporation’s behalf has the right and ultima tely 
the authority to legally enter into a real estate t ransaction.  
Judicial Sales  
A judicial sale is the sale of real property conduc ted under the authority and supervision of the Cour t of 
Queen’s Bench. A judicial sale is a court-ordered s ale of real property and is typically undertaken to  
 
between the owners and those who have a registered interest in the property. Judicial sales are the re sult 
of legal actions taken by the parties commenced thr ough the court system for a variety of reasons. 
Because of this legal action, courts require the fo rced sale of real property associated with one or m ore 
of the disputing parties as a way to resolve the is sue. 
Due to the nature of this type of transaction, real  estate professionals may be uncertain as to who is  the 
client. In the event of a judicial sale, the court provides direction to the real estate professional and 
decides the outcome of the real estate transaction regarding the property in question. Real estate 
professionals must clearly understand the guideline s provided by the court regarding the judicial sale  
and strictly adhere to those guidelines throughout the sale of the real property.  
The reason for a property to be the subject of a ju dicial sale is to resolve a dispute between the pro perty 
owners, or between the property owners and those wi th a legal or registered interest in the property. This 
might include any of the following circumstances:  
Mortgage Debt:  The mortgage lender seeks repayment for funds owed  by the property owner (i.e. 
borrower) who is in default. This may apply to any priority of mortgage, such as a first mortgage, sec ond 
mortgage, third mortgage, etc. 
Income Tax Debt:  Canada Revenue Agency seeks payment for personal o r corporate income taxes in 
default. The amount would include penalties and int erest on the unpaid amount(s). 
Property Tax Debt:  The municipality has the authority to seek payment  for unpaid property taxes plus 
interest from the property owner. Unpaid property t axes have a higher priority than mortgage debt.  
Condominium Fee:  The condominium corporation seeks payment for unpa id condominium fees by a 
unit owner, such as monthly condominium contributio n or the properly levied special assessment owned 
for capital expenditures. 
Condominium Bylaw : The failure of a condominium unit owner to abide b y the Bylaws of the 
Condominium on a continuous and egregious basis. Fo r example, after repeated notices regarding their 
non-compliance to the condominium bylaws, a unit ow ner continues to reside with pets in their unit 
when the corporation prohibits unit owners from hav ing pets. 
Owner Dispute:  A dispute between property owners to be resolved t hrough the courts by the sale of the 
property and distribution of the resulting funds. 
Owner Death:  Disputes between property owners triggered by the death of one owner regarding the 
distribution of the deceased owner’s interest in th e property. This may occur when the property title was 
held as tenants in common. In this case, the benefi ciary of the deceased owner’s estate inherits their  
interest in the property as opposed to the other ow ners.  The other owners may seek to resolve the dis pute 
through the courts resulting in the sale of the pro perty. 
Estate Settlement:  Any dispute between trustees and beneficiaries of an estate that seeks resolution 
through the courts through the sale of the associat ed property and the ultimate distribution of the 
resulting sale proceeds. 
Divorce Settlement:  The dissolution of a marriage in which the divisio n of the marital assets are 
disputed. Because of the dispute, the court becomes  involved in the distribution of the marital assets  and 
 
ordered to be disposed of through the courts. For e xample, seizure of a property by law enforcement du e 
to the property’s connection to criminal activity o r its purchase paid for with illegitimate funds suc h as 
proceeds from criminal activity.  
Property Expropriation:  A dispute between a property owner and the governme nt that is attempting to 
expropriate the owner’s land for the public good. T his refers to eminent domain, which is the right of  
the government, or its agencies, to take private pr operty for public use. In this case, the buyer of t he 
property is known (i.e. government or its agency); however, the court determines the value of property  
for the purpose of the sale.   
Other Debt:  The creditor seeks payment for debts owed by the p roperty owner in default. In this case, 
the debt owed by the property owner is for other th an unpaid mortgage, income tax, property tax, or 
condominium fees. It usually relates to a legal set tlement giving the courts the authority to order th e sale 
of the property. 
Foreclosures  
Judicial sales are the primary debt recovery method  for default mortgages in Alberta and is part of th e 
foreclosure process. Foreclosure is a legal action supervised by the court that a lender pursues follo wing 
a borrower’s default on a mortgage. It transfers th e real property from the borrower to the lender and  
erases interests on title after the foreclosed mort gage was registered. Equity in land is extinguished  and 
debt outstanding on the mortgage is settled. 
If a borrower defaults on the terms and conditions set out in the mortgage agreement, the lender can 
initiate foreclosure proceedings as established in the Law of Property Act, Land Titles Act, Alberta’s 
Rules of Court, and contract law. A borrower is gra nted certain rights that provide procedural safegua rds 
to slow the foreclosure process, if the borrower is  unable or unwilling to reconcile the outstanding d ebt, 
the lender can apply to the court and seek an Order  for Judicial Sale of the property. The Alberta Rul es 
of Court and the Law of Property Act  (Part 5) provide for the Judicial Sale.   
In carrying out a judicial sale, the court may offe r the property for sale at a time and place in any manner 
and at any price that the court considers proper. T he court may also decide to order that the property  be 
sold by advertising for offers to the public. Adver tisements in newspapers or through property databas es 
notifying the public of a judicial sale and invitin g tenders (i.e. offers) is an example of how these 
directions are carried out. There are situations wh en advertising is not required.  
Other means the court may consider include listing the property (entering into a written service 
agreement) with real estate professionals when the court is convinced this will be more effective in t he 
sale of the property. All reasonable offers are bro ught to the court for approval through an applicati on 
made by the lender. Any proposed sale to a third pa rty must receive court approval. If an offer proves  
acceptable to the court, the lender applies for an order confirming the sale and vesting the title (le gally 
giving the title) of the property to the buyer with in 25 days of the tenders closing.   
When an order confirming sale and vesting title is granted, the property is sold and the title is conv eyed 
to the buyer free and clear of the borrower’s inter est. The borrower’s right of redemption is terminat ed, 
however the order does not eliminate the debt oblig ation of the mortgage.  The proceeds from the sale 
 
Mortgage Financing, in the Fundamentals of Real Est ate course.  
SUMMARY 
Knowing your client, whether an individual or entit y, and understanding the unique objectives and goal s 
they seek as a result of a real estate transaction is fundamental to professionalism and providing 
competent service. Along with the due diligence act ivities required to meet the client’s objectives, y ou 
must determine the services that each client may re quire and the performance expectations for those 
services. Real estate professionals who demonstrate  a willingness and interest in getting to know thei r 
clients may increase the likelihood that those clie nts may choose to work with them again. 
 
 
